Title: Example-based Robust Abnormality Detection with Minimal Annotations using Exemplar Med-DETR

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.24281v1

Published Time: Wed, 26 Aug 2026 00:59:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 39

Markdown Content:
# Graphical Abstract 

Example-based Robust Abnormality Detection with Minimal An-notations using Exemplar Med-DETR 

Sheethal Bhat, Bogdan Georgescu, Awais Mansoor, Mathias Zinnen, Pranjal Sahu, Florin C. Ghesu, Sasa Grbic, Andreas Maier 

Figure 1: Overview of the pretraining and finetuning stages of Exemplar Med-DETR (EM-DETR). The model is pretrained on a set of base classes and finetuned on a smaller set of the novel class of interest. The Exemplar generation module G extracts the patches belong-ing to Region-of-Interest (ROI) and computes a unique exemplar or prototype embedding per class. These embeddings are stored in a memory bank and are used during inference (dotted arrows) for improved detection. The decoder learns to associate the derived ex-emplar embeddings with the characteristics of the class in an image, along with the text, thus allowing minimal-shot detection. This approach lays the foundation for a continuous learning framework with minimal annotations when new findings are introduced. arXiv:2608.24281v1 [cs.CV] 25 Aug 2026 Highlights 

Example-based Robust Abnormality Detection with Minimal An-notations using Exemplar Med-DETR 

Sheethal Bhat, Bogdan Georgescu, Awais Mansoor, Mathias Zinnen, Pranjal Sahu, Florin C. Ghesu, Sasa Grbic, Andreas Maier • Scaling Exemplar Med-DETR with Minimal Annotations: Demon-strates how exemplar-based detection can effectively scale to large chest radiography datasets with minimal annotation effort, reducing reliance on extensive labeled data for new findings. • Adaptable Framework for Emerging Findings: Proposes a structure that could be extended to accommodate new disease classes with lim-ited retraining, offering a foundation for future continuous learning that avoids catastrophic forgetting on previously learned classes. • Includes evaluations on both proprietary and public CXR datasets with ablation studies, demonstrating robustness and scalability under minimal-annotation and out-of-distribution settings. Example-based Robust Abnormality Detection with Minimal Annotations using Exemplar Med-DETR 

Sheethal Bhat a,b , Bogdan Georgescu c, Awais Mansoor c, Mathias Zinnen a,Pranjal Sahu c, Florin C. Ghesu b, Sasa Grbic c, Andreas Maier a

> aPattern Recognition Lab, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität, Erlangen, 91058, Germany
> bDigital Technology and Innovation, Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, , Germany
> cDigital Technology and Innovation, Siemens Medical Solutions, Princeton, NJ, 08540, U.S.A

Abstract 

Reducing annotation requirements remains a key challenge in developing ro-bust medical object detectors. To address this, Vision-Language (VL) ob-ject detection methods leverage grounding text information to enable pow-erful zero-shot and few-shot object detectors in the natural image domain [1, 2, 3, 4]. However, transferring these methods to the medical domain is challenging due to the absence of comparable quality and quantity of the grounding data. Regardless, significant contextual and non-imaging informa-tion exists in medical images that remains underutilized. Few-shot learning (FSL) techniques partially address this limitation but struggle to general-ize to unseen medical findings and require extensive retraining when new findings are introduced [5, 6]. To overcome these challenges, we extend our prior EM-DETR framework [7] and introduce a scalable FS detection ap-proach designed for efficient abnormality detection in Chest X-Ray (CXR) images under minimal supervision. The proposed architecture incorporates exemplar-based feature generation and domain-aware contrastive optimiza-tion, enabling effective adaptation to novel disease findings without exhaus-tive retraining. Our method achieves near state-of-the-art (SOTA) detection performance using less than 10% of the annotated data, demonstrating its potential for practical, annotation-efficient clinical deployment across both proprietary and public CXR datasets. 

Keywords: Multi-modal DETR, Abnormality Detection, Minimal   

> Email address: sheethal.bhat@fau.de (Sheethal Bhat)

Annotations 

1. Introduction 

Deep learning has achieved remarkable progress in visual understanding tasks, yet these advances are heavily dependent on large-scale annotated datasets [8, 9]. In the medical imaging domain, obtaining such annotations remains a persistent bottleneck, as each label requires expert interpretation that is time-consuming, and often varies across institutions and modalities [7, 10, 11]. Reducing the annotation effort while maintaining high diagnostic performance has therefore been a central research objective for Computer-Aided Diagnostic (CAD) systems [12, 13]. In pursuit of this goal, various strategies have been proposed in the lit-erature aimed at reducing the dependence on manual expert annotations. These approaches range from weakly-supervised and semi-supervised learn-ing methods that exploit incomplete labels [14, 15, 16], as well as active learning methods that selectively query the most informative samples[17], and few-shot learning (FSL) methods that aim to generalize from only a handful of labeled examples per class [5, 6]. Nevertheless, these methods have not yet demonstrated competitive spatial precision at scale in medical imaging tasks [ ? ]. In contrast to these annotation-efficient approaches, recent multi-modal Vision-language (VL) detection methods [1, 2, 4] demonstrate zero-shot, open-vocabulary detection capabilities over a wide variety of target classes in computer vision datasets [8, 9]. These results are achieved in part through strong pretraining and the use of a large number of semi-automatically gen-erated “grounding” captions. However, transferring these methods to the medical domain remains difficult: radiology reports rarely provide explicit fine-grained grounding descriptions, and similar large-scale grounded med-ical datasets are not available. As a result, integrating annotations with descriptive text and spatial location, despite its potential to reduce the bur-den of annotations, remains largely underexplored in medical imaging. In Chest X-Ray (CXR) research, current state-of-the-art (SOTA) sys-tems rely extensively on both increased number of annotations per finding and post-processing techniques such as handcrafted Non-Maximal Suppres-sion (NMS) [18] methods to achieve high diagnostic accuracy. Nonetheless, in the current age of automated report production [19, 20, 21], there is an 2increasing need for CAD systems that can detect findings with minimal an-notations. This need is particularly evident in CXR datasets, which often contain long-tailed label distributions in which many findings are represented by only a small number of samples [10, 22]. Thus, it is beneficial to develop a CAD system that learns from base class(es) where training data are inex-pensive to acquire, available in abundance; and therefore can achieve optimal performance with minimal annotations for novel or rare findings. These requirements motivated our example-based abnormality detection method, called Exemplar Med-DETR (EM-DETR) [7], which reduces the dependence on dense annotations and avoids post-processing. Although in-spired by VL detection architectures, EM-DETR operates on learnt visual ex-emplars, making it suitable for domains without grounded radiology captions. In our previous work, we demonstrated that EM-DETR achieves SOTA per-formance in multiple medical domains, such as the detection of mass and cal-cification in mammography, masses in CXR images, and stenoses in angiog-raphy images [7]. In this study, we evaluate the performance of EM-DETR by simulating a minimal-shot scenario with a set of novel or rare classes that are held out during base class training. This allows us to assess the ability of EM-DETR to detect clinically important but sparsely annotated findings under realistic annotation constraints. With the recent success of transformer-based multi-modal detection pipe-lines, our proposed approach is based on the principles of grounding DINO [1], which extends GLIP [2] and DETR [23] to tightly fuse language and vi-sion modalities through a feature enhancer and cross-modality decoder. To incorporate prototypical visual cues, we introduce an Exemplar Generation Module G, which serves as an additional input to the decoder (see Fig. 3). The module derives an exemplar or prototype class-specific embedding for each class. This embedding is included in the cross-attention pipeline such that the decoder detects regions that not only match the text description but also the visual features of that class. In other words, to the existing multi-modal framework, we add class-conditional knowledge (few-shot exemplars or prototypes) into the detection process. This encourages decision boundaries that reflect semantic distances between findings rather than relying solely on their correlation with text descriptions. Theoretically, this enables improved generalization to unseen domains or novel classes, supports few-shot learn-ing through stable prototype anchors, and reduces overfitting to frequently occurring classes. In addition to architectural modifications, we also adapt the model to 3the unique characteristics of the CXR data, which differ substantially from natural image datasets. As CXR images are acquired under standardized protocols, they exhibit strong spatial alignment [24], with several abnor-malities consistently appearing in specific anatomical regions. Furthermore, unlike natural images where class features are typically distinct (e.g., car vs. tree), CXR findings often exhibit high intra-class variability due to disease manifestation [25], and the overlapping features of different abnormalities. Accurate diagnosis also depends on contextual, often non-imaging, informa-tion [26], increasing the difficulty of purely appearance-based discrimination. Given these domain-specific challenges and the reliance of EM-DETR on con-trasting classes, we find that explicit selection of negative samples plays a critical role in enhancing localization accuracy—even in minimal-annotation regimes. Our main contributions are summarized as follows: • Scaling EM-DETR with minimal annotations: Demonstrates how exemplar-based detection can scale effectively in chest radiographs using only a small number of labeled samples, reducing annotation bur-den for clinical deployment. • Adaptable framework for new findings: Proposes an architecture designed to facilitate addition of new disease classes with limited re-training, forming a basis for future work in continuous learning. • Domain-aware iterative negative sampling: Introduces a domain-specific background selection strategy for iterative contrastive learning, improving training stability and detection accuracy in multi-class, long-tailed scenarios. • Evaluation on CXR datasets: Validated across proprietary and public datasets with ablation studies, including an out-of-distribution test, demonstrating robustness under minimal-annotation scenarios. 

2. Related Works 

The field of abnormality detection in radiology has been extensively re-searched in the domain of Artificial Intelligence (AI), with numerous SOTA techniques available that include open-source [27 ? , 28] and commercial op-tions [26, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33]. Approaches to reduce manual annotations for 4AI training is one of the most active research areas in medical AI at the mo-ment [25, 34, 35, 36]. These strategies can be broadly categorized into weakly-or semi-supervised learning, multi-modal learning, and few-shot learning ap-proaches, spanning tasks in classification, detection, and segmentation across both computer vision and medical domains. In the following sections, we re-view the current research landscape in these domains, highlighting recent advances and methodological trends. 

2.1. Weakly or semi-supervised methods 

Weakly or semi-supervised frameworks leverage unlabelled or weakly la-belled data through pseudo-labels obtained by various methods such as clus-tering, consistency regularization or contextual label generation. Recent studies by Ju et al. [37] address universal semi-supervised learning for clas-sification by employing a variational auto-encoder (VAE). The VAE is pre-trained to understand unseen samples based on the assumption that these samples follow a different distribution. The authors propose a unified frame-work using a "dual-path outlier estimation scheme". While elegant, this approach is strongly dependent on the Gaussian distribution assumption of the underlying data. Alternatively, He et al. [38] demonstrate open-set semi-supervised classification through a multi-binary discriminator and a joint outlier filter mechanism, learning prototypes that help identify distinct classes. In the field of segmentation, Du et al. [39] propose using a geomet-ric prior along with contrastive loss to improve 3D segmentation with only bounding box annotations and Kuang et al. [40] propose multi-class seg-mentation through “feature decomposition’. Likewise, Li et al. [41] present a weakly supervised segmentation approach for histopathology images us-ing multi-instance learning (MIL) with self-attention, effectively aggregating global contextual information through deep supervision. Alternatively, the authors of INSIGHT [42] draw on general vision strategies, combining a de-tection module with a heatmap aggregator for classification and segmentation at the same time. For a broader overview, Jiao et al. [43] provide a com-prehensive survey of semi-supervised learning techniques for medical image segmentation. Beyond the medical domain, semi-supervised and weakly supervised meth-ods have also been extensively explored in general computer vision tasks. Weak supervision in computer vision typically uses box, point annotations [44] and image-level labels, while annotation types in medical imaging employ 5points, scribbles, and gaze [45, 46]. Moreover, in the medical domain, there is a greater influence of domain shift, spatial resolution, and class imbalance compared to the general image domain. Recent studies in the latter domain include STAC [47] and object detection via teacher-student training [15, 48], which are used to produce pseudo-labels for unlabeled images. On the other hand, for holistic scene understanding, weakly and semi-supervised panoptic segmentation methods have emerged as efficient alternatives to full supervi-sion. Works such as Li et al. [49], Li et al. [50], and Lee et al. [51] integrate semantic and instance cues through proposal refinement, region-to-pixel con-sistency, and cross-task distillation, respectively, to jointly segment “thing” and “stuff” categories with limited labels. Nevertheless, such progress does not directly translate to medical detection in CXRs, where the challenge lies in localizing subtle findings rather than performing generic classification or pixel-level segmentation. In the following section, we investigate multi-modal approaches that facilitate DL tasks with minimal annotations. 

2.2. Vision-Language (VL) methods 

Recent multimodal methods, especially vision–language frameworks, im-prove model performance by integrating contextual knowledge from accom-panying text, effectively using language as a weak supervisory signal. Early studies, including UNITER [52] and OSCAR [53], focus on developing univer-sal embeddings or features by pretraining with image-caption datasets in the natural image domain. UNITER [52] presents four pretraining tasks, includ-ing masked language/region modeling, VL matching, and optimal-transport word–region alignment, aimed at achieving detailed text and image region alignment. OSCAR [53] similarly uses object tags as “anchor” tokens to align image regions with words, pretraining on 6.5M image–text pairs and achiev-ing SOTA on VQA, retrieval, and grounding benchmarks [54, 55, 56, 57, 58]. These methods illustrate the core paradigm of concatenating region fea-tures (from object detectors) with text tokens and applying cross-modal self-attention. In this context, the text acts as a distinctive encoding key, enabling the transformer encoder-decoder mechanism to effectively recognize image data from the provided textual input. Likewise, recent methods like GLIP[2] and OWL-ViT[4] develop open-vocabulary detectors that utilize contrastive image-text training with vision transformers, enabling text-conditioned training on arbitrary categories. The most recent VL model Grounding DINO [1] further improves upon GLIP[2] by combining the powerful DINO backbone with grounded language-based 6object detection, leading to further enhancements in zero-shot object de-tection performance. This approach incorporates enhancements to the De-tection Transformer Encoder-Decoder (DETR), including the use of a de-formable MS-attention encoder along with robust pretraining utilizing cap-tions and descriptions from over 1.8 million images. This setup facilitates open-set detection for wide variety of unseen classes. On the other hand, BLIP [59] focuses on data: It bootstraps noisy web images by using a cap-tioner to generate high-quality captions and a filter to remove noise, enabling unified pretraining for both understanding and generation. BLIP achieves strong gains in retrieval, captioning, and VQA by leveraging this synthetic web-scale supervision. Beyond alignment and detection, large multi-modal methods now han-dle open-ended and few-shot tasks. Flamingo [60] is a few-shot VLM that interleaves pretrained vision and language modules via a “perceiver” resam-pler, later extended to Med-Flamingo [36]. The model processes mixed text and images to address open-ended tasks through prompts. With only a handful of examples, Med-Flamingo shows SOTA few-shot performance on medical VQA benchmarks, outperforming methods that were fine-tuned on much larger datasets. Analogously, Kosmos-2 [61] extends these ideas to a generalist multi-modal LLM. Trained from scratch on web-scale interleaved image–text data, Kosmos-2 [61] supports zero-/few-shot learning, instruction following, and even OCR-free language tasks by converting visual inputs into “language” tokens. It shows strong performance on various VL benchmarks such as captioning and VQA. In contrast, MedOptNet [35] proposes a meta-learning framework utilizing high-performance convex optimization methods for few-shot classification. Despite impressive results on few-shot classification and reporting tasks, the medical domain lacks large-scale grounding text paired with bounding box annotations, limiting the applicability of these methods for few-shot de-tection. VL methods can reduce annotation needs, but only when textual cues provide meaningful guidance. Methods such as Grounding DINO [1] under-perform on unseen classes in few-shot evaluations, and Flamingo [60] struggles to localize specific findings. Language-based supervision is further limited in the medical domain due to scarce pretraining data, a constrained and non-standardized vocabulary, and frequent overlap of terms across dif-ferent findings [62, 63, 17]. 72.3. Few-shot learning methods 

Few-shot detection enables models to adapt to new classes with minimal samples, leveraging pretraining on base classes. Bulat et al. [5] introduce FS-DETR, a few-shot detection transformer that uses visual prompts to de-tect novel classes. By generating visual templates and pseudo-class embed-dings with a strong image backbone, FS-DETR outperforms zero-shot and even some fine-tuning methods on benchmarks like PASCALVOC [9] and MSCOCO [8]. In natural images, ROIs (e.g., “cat” or “dog”) yield discrim-inative embeddings from ImageNet-pretrained CNNs [64], enabling effective template matching. In contrast, CXR ROIs such as “pleural effusion” or “lesion” produce overlapping embeddings [65] (see Fig. A.12, Appendix A), influenced by anatomical structures and lacking isolated class examples. As a result, the decoder must distinguish pathological from normal anatomy us-ing both global and local context, motivating the need for a robust template generator that produces highly discriminative, class-specific features. Meanwhile Zhang et al. present Meta-DETR [6], that bypasses region pro-posals and uses an inter-class correlational meta-learning strategy to improve few-shot object detection, mainly achieved by capturing the correlation be-tween classes. These methods highlight the trend toward encoder-decoder ar-chitectures that treat all V+L tasks as generative language modeling. While both FS-DETR [5] and Meta-DETR [6] extend DETR for few-shot detec-tion using meta-learning concepts, FS-DETR [5] primarily focuses on fea-ture re-adaptation and query re-weighting, whereas Meta-DETR introduces a meta-learning module that learns transferable parameters for task-level adaptation. Although effective on computer vision datasets, these methods do not translate as strongly across all CXR medical findings. Complementing these studies, several recent works have advanced few-shot image classification through diverse representation learning strategies. Zheng et al. [66] proposed Unsupervised Few-Shot Image Classification via One-vs-All Contrastive Learning, extending few-shot learning to unsuper-vised settings by leveraging contrastive objectives. Building on these foun-dations, Semantic-Guided Generalization Enhancement (SGE) [67] integrates semantic priors to guide generalization, addressing the semantic shift across domains in few-shot learning. Similarly, Wu et al. [68] developed invari-ant and consistent unsupervised representation learning for few-shot visual recognition, emphasizing stability under feature transformations. Together, these studies illustrate a coherent research trajectory focused on enhanc-ing feature robustness, semantic consistency, and generalization in low-data 8regimes, forming a solid foundation for subsequent multimodal or domain-adaptive extensions such as MERGE [69] and DARA [70]. Converse to previous work focussing on classification, Wang et al. pre-sented a prototype-based feature mapping network designed to address the adaptation of the few-shot domain in medical segmentation in PFMNet [71]. However, these approaches are primarily designed for natural image domains within the few-shot learning paradigm, often focus solely on classification or segmentation, and do not readily translate to robust few-shot detection of multiple findings in CXR medical imaging. Furthermore, open-source im-plementations are limited, hindering replication and extension. Building on these observations, we next detail the dataset preparation and the proposed EM-DETR adaptation for minimal-shot CXR detection, before presenting the experimental results. 

3. Data preparation 

We first examine our hypothesis on a smaller anatomy dataset to ver-ify the feasibility of few-shot detection using EM-DETR. This approach is logical, as anatomy detection on CXRs is less challenging compared to the detection of complex findings. Subsequently, we proceed to assess EM-DETR using minimal annotations on larger standard datasets and intricate findings. Towards this end, two separate datasets ( A and B) are derived from a larger private dataset that was acquired from multiple sites in the United States and Europe. The study includes frontal and lateral chest exams from adult cohorts ( >18 years). Two general radiologists independently reviewed and annotated all CXRs with the presence and location of 16 findings. Athird general radiologist served as an independent tiebreaker for discrepant findings. The following subsections detail the private dataset specifics, and then describe the public dataset used for further evaluation. 

3.1. Proprietary CXR Anatomy dataset 

We use a dataset A of anatomy annotations, comprising 100 full-resolution anonymized DICOM images. The dataset includes 80 frontal images for training and 20 for validation. The splits are obtained patient-wise to avoid patient overlap. The images contain segmentation masks for 7 of the major organs such as the lungs, clavicle, heart, aorta, and ribs, as shown in Fig. 2. The 7 segmentation masks are first converted into bounding box coor-dinates. These annotations are further separated into left and right organ 9Figure 2: Example image from the anatomy dataset, where we only use the frontal views and discard the lateral views. 

classes, resulting in 10 classes. Table. 2 denotes the final number of classes used to train EM-DETR. Moreover, the ribs and spine annotations are also divided into 3 separate classes: upper, middle, and lower organ. The de-marcations are obtained using a third of the original height of the bounding box. To simulate a few-shot condition, only five training images include annotations of the heart region. 

3.2. Proprietary CXR Abnormality dataset 

A second dataset B of 18,681 full-resolution anonymized DICOM CXR images is used to evaluate the few-shot performance of EM-DETR on 3 differ-ent CXR findings. The dataset includes frontal-view images of patients, an-notated with bounding boxes indicating the presence of 16 findings provided by an expert panel of radiologists. We use a split of 3 validation datasets of 331, 412 and 412 images for pleural effusion, pneumothorax (ptx) and lesion detection. The validation datasets have binary labels {1,0} indicating the existence or absence of a finding. We ensure that there is no overlap between the patients in the training and validation splits and Table. 1 presents the data split with the number of positive samples in brackets. Pleural effusion is a relatively easy finding for the network to detect while pneumothorax and lesion are more challenging. Together, they cover the spectrum of difficulty for detection in CXRs [72, 16]. To simulate a minimal-shot scenario, a pretraining dataset called BP is created with all findings excluding pleural effusion, pneumothorax, and lesion. The finetuning dataset 

BF is then composed of a smaller number of images with the finding of interest and a sufficient number of images without the finding, which are taken as negative samples. For eg. a smaller subset of 200 images with pneumothorax 10 Finding Images (Positive samples) Training Test       

> Pleural effusion 18,681(4037) 331(74) Pneumothorax 18,681(1868) 412(146) Lesion 18,681(5654) 412(109) Table 1: Number of images per finding in the training and test sets. The number in the brackets indicate the number of positive samples for each finding.

and 800 images without pneumothorax is taken as the finetuning dataset for pneumothorax. This accounts for 7% of the entire training dataset, where the samples are selected at random. This training scheme simulates a minimal-shot scenario, in which we have a powerful pretrained model, and introduce a new class with minimal annotations. 

3.3. Public CXR Abnormality dataset 

Additionally, we test the finetuned EM-DETR model on the public VinDR-CXR test dataset [10] without any further finetuning. The VinDR-CXR [10] testing dataset comprises 3000 images and features 22 local labels alongside 6 global labels. We test the classification and FROC performance for pneu-mothorax due to it being a difficult task with only 18 positive samples in this test dataset. 

4. Method 

Inspired by FS-DETR [5], we adapt our previously introduced EM-DETR [7] for minimal-shot detection. The proposed framework consists of two main components: exemplar-based finetuning and iterative contrastive training. In the following subsections, we first describe how per-finding exemplars are gen-erated to enhance detection, and then explain the iterative training scheme. EM-DETR builds on multi-modal DETR [23, 1], performing “language-guided query selection” via cross-attention between image and text embed-dings. To guide detection, we learn class-specific exemplars computed from visual features corresponding to each class’s spatial location, bootstrapping template generation similarly to FS-DETR. A moving average of these exem-plars are interleaved with the text embeddings and passed to the Detection Transformer Encoder-Decoder pipeline. Attending to these exemplars en-ables the detection heads to perform prototype-based searches, facilitating 11 Figure 3: Overview of EM-DETR pretraining. Visual features Xk & positional embeddings                      

> Pkare extracted from the frozen image backbone based on the kth class location (red).
> Fuses learnable class-specific embeddings ct k&ce kto calculate qk. A moving average of qkresults in the prototype embedding ek.Interleaving the text embedding tkwith
> ekenables text-and feature-based detection for each base class. ekis used in additional
> Lcontrast &Lf eat losses to improve the decoder search operations.

straightforward expansion to novel classes. Fig. 3 illustrates the EM-DETR pretraining stage, including exemplar generation and the additional losses that regularize the generated exemplars. To further improve learning, we adopt an iterative contrastive strategy. In each stage, hard negatives are mined either by generating background annotations from normal images or by leveraging false positives, refining class prototypes and improving overall detection performance. 

4.1. Exemplar Generation G:

The Swin transformer [73] image backbone is a multi-scale, shifted win-dow transformer that produces a set of J patch embeddings X′ = [ x1, ... xJ ]T

for an input image, where each xj ∈ Rd. A similar dimension set of positional encodings is also generated, denoted as P′ = [ p1, ... pJ ]T . Let Xk ⊂ X′ and 

Pk ⊂ P′ represent the set of M tokens that fall within the ROI derived from the bounding box ground truth annotations of the class k (red). In CXRs, certain findings consistently manifest in predictable patterns and are frequently localized to specific areas, such as in the cases of “pleural effusion” and “cardiomegaly”. Conversely, other findings exhibit significant variability in both presentation and anatomical location. To account for this, 12 Pk is scaled by a learnable class-specific parameter ak ∈ R and added to Xk.This produces Hk, mathematically shown as 

Hk = Xk + Pk × ak. (1) 

ak modulates the impact of the positional embeddings, thereby influencing the decoder search operation. Additional learnable class-wise token ct k and positional c embeddings are then concatenated with Hk. The simple atten-tion pooling transformer F processes the concatenated result to learn a single normalized embedding using self-attention mechanism [74]. The use of ct k

and ct k within F provides additional class-specific information that helps to build a unique example feature. Concurrently, ct k and ce k are also added to the output of F to produce qk ∈ Rd encapsulating the textural and spatial features corresponding to class k. The addition of ct k and ce k is analogous to the positional embeddings added to the text embeddings in the feature enhancer [1, 6]. Mathematically, qk is given as 

qk = F(concat (ct k, ce k, Hk)) + ct k + ce k, (2) where k ∈ { 1, . . . , N } and N is the total number of classes. A per-class moving average is calculated over L samples of qk, thereby generating the prototype embedding ek ∈ Rd. This prevents the decoder from pursuing rapidly changing features during each training iteration. ek is stored in a 

Memory bank as a prototype feature embedding that helps prevent catas-trophic forgetting. Eventually, model inference relies on the memory bank of saved feature representations, or exemplars ek, since ROI regions are not available for ek generation in test images. In parallel, the frozen text encoder processes text prompts and produces embeddings tk which are interleaved with the corresponding ek and passed downstream to the encoder-decoder pipeline [23, 1]. The text prompt inputs are literal class names (e.g. “pleural effusion”, “background”). Fig. 4 illus-trates the interleaving and encoding operations in greater detail. Attention masks ensure that self-attention is applied within the tokens for each class at a sub-sentence level similar to [1]. Thereafter, the decoder predicts the location of the kth class by processing the cross-attention encodings of the text and representative visual features, 

tk and ek with the input image embeddings, X′ and P′. This is done through a contrastive search that looks for highest cosine similarity between the many hypothesis boxes and the text or feature embeddings. 13 Figure 4: Representation of the per-class interleaving of the text and feature embeddings. The tokens generated from the encoder undergo self-attention at a sub-sentence level through additional attention masks [1]. 

Additional Losses L:. In addition to the original DETR loss terms Lbbox ,

LIoU , and Lclassify in [1] we introduce two additional loss functions to im-prove the robustness of EM-DETR. A cosine similarity contrastive feature loss Lcontrast , is applied on E = [ e1... eN ]T of all 1 ≤ k ≤ N classes. Lcontrast 

ensures that all class prototype embeddings remain orthogonal to each other in the latent space, promoting distinct and separable representations [75]. A 

L2 feature loss , Lf eat , is applied between ek and the decoder’s top proposal 

dk for class k ensuring that the model predicts a consistent latent repre-sentation for each class [5, 6]. This approach helps maintain class-specific embeddings over time while stabilizing the training process. Although pre-vious studies[5, 6] indicate that Lf eat does not significantly affect precision results in general vision studies, it is empirically observed to improve our Free Response Operating Characteristic (FROC) results [7]. 

4.2. Iterative training strategy: 

The trained decoder learns class-specific features but struggles to distin-guish normal anatomy from disease traits in abnormality detection. There-fore, we propose a multi-stage iterative learning approach, for effective minimal-shot abnormality detection. Fig. 5 illustrates the iterative training schematic. Stage I involves pretraining the proposed model with all base class anno-tations dataset BP , while subsequent finetuning stages refine the weights through a binary per-class background-versus-foreground detection task us-ing only the minimal positive samples. 14 Figure 5: Schematic of iterative training strategy, where ∗ denotes generated annotations. 

Fig. 6 illustrates the EM-DETR workflow for finetuning and inference. In our framework, finetuning is not restricted to a single stage but is designed as a modular, multi-stage strategy that incrementally refines the model for a given novel class. For example, Stage II initiates this process, and additional stages can be appended to further improve performance by leveraging feed-back from prior stages, such as false positive suppression. This design allows continued adaptation without retraining from scratch. In Stage II training, the pretrained model is trained on dataset BF . The pretrained memory bank-I of the base classes, can either be discarded to cre-ate a binary class memory bank-II or extended by incorporating novel class exemplars, depending on the model design. Since the network’s classifica-tion layer aligns text prompts with hypothesis regions, freezing the decoder doesn’t significantly impact performance. However, freezing the encoder in Stage II impairs performance, as the novel class features require cross-attention encoding. F stays trainable to ensure effective attention pooling for the novel classes. In an additional Stage III, we evaluate the Stage II model on the training dataset and denote the False Positive (FP) regions as background classes to further refine the network. This helps the model refine its ability to separate visually ambiguous areas from actual pathological findings. During inference, the memory bank is used exclusively, as there are no ROIs available. 

Background generation: . The effectiveness of the contrastive detection model depends on the contrastive learning scheme between classes. In med-ical applications such as CXR, two main challenges arise: differentiating anatomical features from abnormalities and distinguishing closely related class features. To address this, we reformulate the multi-class problem into a binary detection task by negative mining the background class from images that do not contain the finding. Moreover, CXR images have an advantage over natural images, as they 15 Figure 6: Overview of the finetuning and inference process. The memory bank accumu-lated during Stage I is either discarded or the novel class embeddings are added to create a new memory bank II. The inference path is shown in dotted arrow line. 

are typically well-aligned. Although the location of each finding may vary, the findings tend to appear in specific anatomical regions. Using these char-acteristics, we select backgrounds based on the prior distribution of findings within our minimal dataset. This approach improves model accuracy by enabling it to distinguish between normal and diseased anatomy. As an ex-ample, Fig. 8 highlights the selection of the foreground and background bounding box regions based on the prior location of pleural effusion and a device. Additionally, stage III uses multiple false positive locations as background annotations to further refine the model, thereby enhancing learning and per-formance metrics. Fig. 7 illustrates the effectiveness of exemplar feature extraction and class separation between the foreground-background classes for pneumothorax and pleural effusion through a TSNE [76] analysis of the embeddings stored in the memory bank. 

5. Experiments 

5.1. Experimental details 

The experiments were run on a single node with four 40 GB A100 GPUs, using a learning rate of 0.0008 with a linear scheduler under the MMDetection [77] framework. An average of 5 runs is recorded. The image and text backbones were frozen. F is designed as a simple 2-head, 4-layer transformer. 16 Figure 7: 2D t-SNE analysis of pneumothorax (left) and pleural effusion (right) prototypes contrasted with their background samples.  

> Figure 8: Diagram to show how background areas are selected based on the finding of interest.

The moving average is computed over L = 200 exemplars. The mean average precision at 50% IoU ( mAP 50 ) is reported. 

Background selection . The image is divided into 4 quadrants, and two background annotations are selected per quadrant, based on the approximate location of the foreground class. We randomly add a 50 pixel top/bottom, left/right perturbation to the selected location along with a 20% variation in size of the bounding box based on the average size of the foreground class. At the final stage III, we further finetune the model with the top 8 misclassified regions (FP) in training images set as background examples. 

5.2. Evaluation metrics 

We evaluate all models using both classification and localization met-rics. For image level classification, the highest probability per image per 17 Category Baseline G.DINO [1] EM-DETR [7] Clavicle 0.94 0.95 Aorta 1.0 0.99                      

> Heart 0.23 0.92
> Lungs 1.0 1.0 Upper ribs 1.0 1.0 Middle ribs 1.0 0.97 Lower ribs 1.0 0.96 Upper spine 1.0 1.0 Middle spine 1.0 1.0 Lower spine 1.0 1.0 Average 0.82 0.98
> Table 2: Few shot detection of the heart class with only 5 training images for heart and 80 training images for other classes. The results are depicted in average mAP 50 . The inclusion of the Exemplar Generation module Gresults in a decrease in detection performance for classes that overlap with the heart region due to overlapping region boundaries.

class is saved to calculate the image level area under the ROC curve (AUC) score. The mAP 50 metric is used to verify the localization result at higher Intersection-over-Union levels of 50%. The default mAP 50 is calculated us-ing the standard coco metric settings provided by the MMDetection [77] framework. As a practical metric, we also evaluate the distance-based Free-response Receiver Operating Characteristic (FROC) response of the model [78, 79, 16, 26, 18, 80, 81]. The sensitivity is computed on the basis of the distance between the center of the ground truth and the predicted box [82]. 

6. Experimental Results 

6.1. Comparison with SOTA 

Table. 2 indicates the few-shot detection results for the “heart” class on the anatomy dataset A. The first column presents per-class mAP 50 for baseline grounding DINO [1], and the second column for EM-DETR. With just 5 heart-annotated images, EM-DETR boosts the mAP 50 from 23% to 92%. However, a 3-4% decrease in the mAP 50 for the middle and lower ribs is observed due to overlapping annotated regions with heart, thus leading to an increase in the cosine similarity and consequent decrease in the classification accuracy. An ablation study in Appendix A.13 indicates that the mAP 50 for the heart reaches 99% with only 15 images. 18 Method Data % Sensitivity AUC mAP 50 

0.25 FP 0.5 FP Ptx 

Baseline G.DINO [1] 7% 0.518 ± γ 0.634 ± γ 0.837 ± ϵ 0.258 ± 0.05 

RPS [18] 7% 0.518 0.642 0.877 -EM-DETR [7] 7% 0.885 ± ϵ 0.932 ± ϵ 0.957 ± 0 0.427 ± 0.02 

Baseline G.DINO [1] 100% 0.843 ± γ 0.925 ± γ 0.960 ± ϵ 0.524 ± 0.03 

RPS [18] 100% 0.970 0.970 0.983 -EM-DETR [7] 100% 0.915 ± ϵ 0.956 ± ϵ 0.980 0.564 ± 0.01 

> Pl. effusion

Baseline G.DINO [1] 7% 0.902 ± γ 0.960 ± γ 0.975 ± ϵ 0.314 ± 0.03 

RPS [18] 7% 0.670 0.819 0.894 -EM-DETR [7] 7% 0.987 ± ϵ 0.987 ± ϵ 0.986 ± ϵ 0.352 ± 0.02 

Baseline G.DINO [1] 100% 0.878 ± γ 0.899 ± γ 0.989 ± ϵ 0.389 ± 0.02 

RPS [18] 100% 0.997 0.997 0.993 -EM-DETR [7] 100% 0.987 ± ϵ 0.987 ± ϵ 0.993 ± ϵ 0.422 ± 0.03 

> Lesion †

Baseline G.DINO [1] 7% 0.309 ± γ 0.368 ± γ 0.730 ± ϵ 0.157 ± 0.02 

RPS [18] 7% 0.420 0.487 0.789 -EM-DETR [7] 7% 0.541 ± ϵ 0.650 ± ϵ 0.865 ± ϵ 0.338 ± 0.01 

Baseline G.DINO [1] 100% 0.458 ± γ 0.678 ± γ 0.901 ± ϵ 0.527 ± 0.02 

RPS [18] 100% 0.800 0.890 0.950 -EM-DETR [7] 100% 0.596 ± ϵ 0.691 ± ϵ 0.899 ± ϵ 0.514 ± 0.02 

Table 3: Comparison of Sensitivity and AUC Scores for Different Findings at Various False Positive Rates and Dataset Sizes. All experiments conducted with a Swin-B image encoder backbone. In the case of Lesion † we evaluate the highest scale of the multi-scale feature from the Swin-B backbone. For readability we denote the standard deviation as 

ϵ ≤ 0.01 and γ ≤ 0.1.

Following this, EM-DETR is tested on a task involving detecting three specific abnormalities or findings. Table. 2 presents the detection results when using only 7% of the training data for pleural effusion, pneumothorax, and lesions. The sensitivites at 0.25 FP and 0.5 FP are noted from the FROC curves along with the classification AUC scores and localization mAP 50 . An average 10–30% point sensitivity improvement and 2–13% point AUC in-crease is observed for all three findings compared to the baseline Ground-ing DINO model [1] when using only 7% of annotations. We also discern 4-16% point improvement in mAP 50 with 7% annotations and a correspond-ing 3-4% point improvement from the baseline when 100% of annotations are used. Our results are further compared with our proprietary Reference 19 Product Solution (RPS), demonstrating comparable performance at maxi-mum annotations and superior performance with minimal annotations in all three cases. We observe that EM-DETR achieves near SOTA sensitivity and classifica-tion results for minimal-shot pleural effusion detection, unlike pneumothorax and lesions. This is attributed to the closely clustered latent space distribu-tion and the consistent positioning of pleural effusion within CXR images as seen in Fig. 7. Analysis of the failure cases in Fig. 11 shows that pleu-ral effusion is typically and correctly detected at the lung bases even when bounding box overlap is low. Conversely, pneumothorax exhibits much higher variation in appearance and location, which is reflected in the ablation study (Section 6.2). Increasing the number of pneumothorax annotations from 200 to 400 substantially im-proves both classification and localization, approaching SOTA performance (Table 6). This underscores the importance of sample diversity for certain pathologies and suggests that uniform random sampling may be insufficient for findings with heterogeneous presentation. Fig. 9 shows the resulting FROC curves for pleural effusion (left) and pneumothorax (right) under 

<10% training data.  

> (a) FROC curve for pleural effusion. (b) FROC curve for pneumothorax
> Figure 9: Example FROC curves from EM-DETR for a pair of findings, displaying the average and standard deviation when finetuned on less than 10% of the training data.

As an additional experiment for lesion detection, we evaluated the pre-trained model using only the highest-resolution scale of the multi-scale fea-tures. Despite this simplification, the model still outperformed the SOTA FROC results. Given that lesions are complex abnormalities, careful selec-20 Method (Dataset size) Sensitivity AUC 0.25FP 0.5FP                                                                      

> EM-DETR (7%) [7] 0.722 ±0.02 *0.833 ±0.01 0.909 ±0.01 *Grounding DINO (7%) [1] 0.556 ±0.06 0.777 ±0.13 0.853 ±0.02
> RPS (7%) [18] 0.278 0.333 0.682 Deformable DETR (7%) [23] 0.271 0.542 0.524 Deformable DETR (100%) [23] 0.944 0.944 0.995
> RPS (100%) [18] 0.889 0.889 0.967 EM-DETR (100%) [7] 0.889 ±0.02 *0.944 ±0.03 *0.965 ±0.01 *Grounding DINO (100%) [1] 0.833 ±0.04 0.833 ±0.03 0.897 ±0.02
> RetinaNet (100%) [83] --0.865 Meta-DETR †(50%) [6] --0.857 RTMDet (100%) [84] --0.806 Deformable DETR †(100%) [23] --0.729 Faster RCNN (100%) [85] --0.496 Table 4: Comparison of pneumothorax performance with various SOTA models. †indi-cates within-distribution tests where the model was trained and evaluated on VinDR-CXR dataset. * indicates statistical significance with p <0.05 when compared to the baseline. Standard deviation provided where available.

tion of background samples is necessary, as evidenced by the performance gap with 100% annotations. We further evaluate our finetuned EM-DETR model on the VinDR-CXR [10] dataset and compare its performance with an in-house RPS solution. The models are finetuned only on the BP and BF datasets and not further fine-tuned on VinDR-CXR, allowing us to assess their out-of-distribution (OOD) performance. As shown in Table 4, EM-DETR outperforms the SOTA base-line when trained with fewer annotations and achieves higher sensitivity at 0.25, 0.5 false positives (FP) per image when using 100% of the available an-notations. These results highlight the efficiency and robustness of EM-DETR in detecting CXR abnormalities even on OOD datasets with minimal super-vision. For additional context, we also report comparisons with other detec-tion methods. These results serve only as reference points, since our primary evaluation focuses on minimal-shot generalization. Additionally, Deformable DETR is evaluated as a within-distribution and out-of-distribution case. The model outperforms the RPS when trained on the internal dataset B as it has more pneumothorax training samples (1868) than the VinDR-CXR dataset (96). However, under the minimal-shot configuration, EM-DETR achieves 21 Configuration Sensitivity AUC mAP 50                                                                      

> 0.25FP 0.5FP
> Baseline 0.518 ±0.01 0.634 ±0.01 0.837 ±0.01 0.258 ±0.11
> Baseline+bkgnd( B)0.611 ±0.01 0.756 ±0.01 0.902 ±0.01 0.331 ±0.01
> Baseline + B+ G0.728 ±0.02 0.806 ±0.02 0.939 ±0.00 0.379 ±0.03
> Baseline + B+G+ frozen F0.766 ±0.01 0.878 ±0.02 0.937 ±0.00 0.346 ±0.02
> EM-DETR 0.885 ±0.01 0.932 ±0.01 0.957 ±0.00 0.427 ±0.02
> Table 5: Impact of each module on classification and detection performance for pneumoth-orax. Experiments are conducted using the Swin-Base backbone within the MMDetection framework, with default data augmentations. The first row shows the baseline perfor-mance. The second row adds B, indicating inclusion of background annotations in the minimal-shot training file. The third row adds G, denoting the exemplar feature extrac-tion module. In the fourth row, frozen Findicates that the attention pooling module is frozen after convergence to further refine the decoder. The last row is the full EM-DETR pipeline finetuned after pretraining on base classes.

the best performance. Meta-DETR, designed for a much smaller k-shot set-ting, is trained with only 50% of VinDR-CXR pneumothorax annotations, as using more samples leads to overfitting and lower performance. 

6.2. Ablation Studies 

In this section, we conduct a few ablation studies to understand the po-tential, limitations, and impact of the components of EM-DETR. Table. 5 lists the impact of each of the proposed modules, where the first row denotes the baseline grounding DINO [1] performance when the model is trained with 2 or more classes. The second row shows the effect of including background annotations and training the model on a background vs. foreground task. This is followed by the impact of our proposed feature extraction module G. In the next experiment, we freeze the attention pooling network F after convergence, to further refine the decoder for an additional 10 epochs. This experiment is conducted to showcase that training both the decoder and feature extractor simultaneously is recognized for its effect on performance[6]. In this scenario, although mAP 50 decreases, the FROC sen-sitivities improve. Freezing the encoder has a similar impact on performance as freezing F .In the last experiment, we use the iterative training strategy, where we pretrain with BP and finetune with BF . (Stage I and Stage II training). 22 Training data Sensitivity AUC mAP 50                                                                         

> 0.25FP 0.5FP
> 50 ptx + bkgnd 0.679 ±0.01 0.773 ±0.01 0.914 0.262 ±0.24
> 50 ptx + FP as bkgnd 0.753 ±0.01 0.856 ±0.01 0.920 0.315 ±0.02
> 100 ptx + bkgnd 0.823 ±0.01 0.893 ±0.01 0.951 0.340 ±0.01
> 200 ptx + bkgnd 0.885 ±0.01 0.932 ±0.01 0.957 0.427 ±0.02
> 400 ptx + bkgnd 0.897 ±0.01 0.934 ±0.00 0.964 0.506 ±0.02
> 100% ptx, no bkgnd 0. 904 ±0.01 0.925 ±0.01 0.977 0.512 ±0.03
> 100% ptx + bkgnd 0.915 ±0.01 0.956 ±0.01 0.980 0.564 ±0.01
> Table 6: Comparison of pneumothorax performance with different number of positive annotations. The negative annotations are kept equal to the positive sample set in each experiment. The second row shows the impact of further retraining the model with False Positives as background annotations in a second stage of finetuning.

Table. 6 demonstrates the impact of different number of pneumothorax annotations. The results show a trend of improvement with more annota-tions, achieving near SOTA RPS levels with just 14% of annotations. Ad-ditionally in the case of 50 positive annotations, we improve results with the Stage III training phase as described in Section 4.2. This refinemenet yields a 7-8% point improvement in sensitivity and an improvement of 5.3% point in mAP 50 . The final two rows illustrate the improved performance of training EM-DETR with and without background samples, underscoring the significance of high-quality contrasting samples for effective learning. 

6.3. Qualitative results 

Fig. 10 highlights a few examples of pleural effusion (top row) and pneu-mothorax detections (bottom row). In some cases, the detected regions are more tightly localized than the ground truth, which often encompasses broader areas or multiple adjacent instances of findings. This mismatch leads to an underestimation of performance in quantitative metrics such as mAP. Since DETR generates multiple hypothesis regions that overlap the tar-get ROI and uses contrastive cosine similarity to match, several overlapping boxes may be valid positives for the same finding. However, these additional detections are counted as false positives by the evaluation framework, thereby reducing the mAP score as well. Fig. 11 illustrates failure cases for pleural effusion detection. In most examples, the model correctly localizes the costophrenic angles and attributes the findings to the appropriate lung. However, a few images show instances 23 Figure 10: Top row illustrates examples of top 2 predictions for pleural effusion while bottom row illustrates examples of top 2 predictions for pneumothorax. The groundtruth is in yellow and predictions in green. We observe detected regions are more tightly localized than ground truth, which may span multiple nearby findings of same class, leading to an artificial reduction in mAP. 

where true pleural effusion regions are misclassified as background. Despite these occasional errors, the overall high AUC score suggests that the model accurately identifies abnormal regions in the majority of cases. 

7. Discussion and Conclusion 

EM-DETR achieves near state-of-the-art results on chest radiographs us-ing fewer than 10% of available annotations, demonstrating a scalable ap-proach for handling long-tailed class distributions with limited annotations. By leveraging few-shot learning to create exemplar or prototype embeddings, our model effectively differentiates between medical findings and anatomical structures, addressing challenges unique to medical imaging. Moreover, the framework is structured to accommodate the addition of new disease classes with limited retraining, laying the groundwork for future studies in contin-uous learning. The method also incorporates domain-aware negative sam-pling, which empirically improves detection of rare classes in our few-shot setting. Our previous conference work demonstrated the generalizability of EM-DETR across multiple imaging domains, including mammography and stenosis detection. In this submission, we focus specifically on the minimal-annotation aspect and its effectiveness for chest radiographs. Evaluation 24 Figure 11: Example images of incorrect detections of pleural effusion on the test dataset. Yellow boxes mark the groundtruth annotation, while blue indicates the predicted pleural effusion with the probability score. The background regions are marked in orange and reflect the training distribution of background annotations. 

across multiple thoracic findings on both proprietary and public datasets demonstrates the robustness and practical utility of the approach. While EM-DETR demonstrates strong performance under minimal-anno-tation settings, there are a few limitations to discuss. The current implemen-tation of EM-DETR is memory-intensive, as it maintains a separate list of patch embeddings and interleaves text and feature embeddings in a naive manner. Moreover, the text encoder functions primarily as a pseudo class identifier to leverage Grounding DINO pretraining, rather than contributing meaningful linguistic grounding. Future work will explore more memory-efficient integration strategies, and also extending text tokens with layer-specific feature embeddings from the multi-scale Swin backbone, enabling finer-grained feature matching and reducing ambiguity between related find-ings. We plan to investigate the implementation of various background pro-totypes to further distinguish anatomical priors. The method is also sen-sitive to annotation noise, as incomplete labeling of co-occurring findings can negatively affect the contrastive loss and lead to performance degrada-tion. Addressing these aspects through improved annotation completeness and architectural refinement will be key to further enhancing EM-DETR’s scalability and robustness. Together, these insights underscore both the promise and current bound-25 aries of EM-DETR in practical deployment. In conclusion, despite the cur-rent limitations, which are primarily related to implementation and memory efficiency, extensive pretraining offers the potential to further boost detection capabilities, positioning EM-DETR as a promising step toward scalable and efficient diagnostic methods in healthcare. 

8. Declaration 

During the preparation of this work the author(s) used AI tools in order to improve grammar and readability. After using this tool/service, the author(s) reviewed and edited the content as needed and take(s) full responsibility for the content of the published article. 

9. Acknowledgment 

This study is funded by Siemens-Healthineers. 

Appendix A. 

Fig. A.12 illustrates the 2D TSNE [76] analysis of image backbone em-beddings for the regions of interest across each class, when processed using the robust TorchXRayVision model[65]. Fig. A.13 presents an ablation study with varying number of few-shot references images for the heart in the anatomy dataset. 26 Figure A.12: 2D TSNE analysis of feature embeddings per class when input to a torchxray vision backbone 

3 5 10 15 0.80.85 0.90.95 1

Number of heart annotations mAP@50 mAP@50 for Heart across k-shot examples. Heart 

> Figure A.13: mAP@50 performance for the Heart class across different few-shot settings.

References 

[1] S. Liu, Z. Zeng, T. Ren, F. Li, H. Zhang, J. Yang, Q. Jiang, C. Li, J. Yang, H. Su, J. Zhu, L. Zhang, Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for open-set object detection, in: A. Leonardis, 27 E. Ricci, S. Roth, O. Russakovsky, T. Sattler, G. Varol (Eds.), Computer Vision – ECCV 2024, Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, 2025, pp. 38– 55. [2] L. H. Li, P. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Yang, C. Li, Y. Zhong, L. Wang, L. Yuan, L. Zhang, J.-N. Hwang, et al., Grounded language-image pre-training, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 10965–10975. [3] A. Zareian, K. D. Rosa, D. H. Hu, S.-F. Chang, Open-vocabulary object detection using captions, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2021, pp. 14393–14402. [4] M. Minderer, A. A. Gritsenko, A. Stone, M. Neumann, D. Weissenborn, A. Dosovitskiy, A. Mahendran, A. Arnab, M. Dehghani, Z. Shen, et al., Simple open-vocabulary object detection with vision transformers. arxiv abs/2205.06230 (2022) (2022). [5] A. Bulat, R. Guerrero, B. Martinez, G. Tzimiropoulos, Fs-detr: Few-shot detection transformer with prompting and without re-training, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023, pp. 11793–11802. [6] G. Zhang, Z. Luo, K. Cui, S. Lu, E. P. Xing, Meta-detr: Image-level few-shot detection with inter-class correlation exploitation, IEEE trans-actions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 45 (11) (2022) 12832–12843. [7] S. Bhat, B. Georgescu, A. B. Panambur, M. Zinnen, T.-T. Nguyen, A. Mansoor, K. K. Elbarbary, S. Bayer, F.-C. Ghesu, S. Grbic, A. Maier, Exemplar med-detr: Toward generalized and robust lesion detection in mammogram images and beyond, in: International Conference on Med-ical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer, 2025. [8] T.-Y. Lin, M. Maire, S. Belongie, J. Hays, P. Perona, D. Ramanan, P. Dollár, C. L. Zitnick, Microsoft coco: Common objects in context, in: Computer vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European conference, zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, proceedings, part v 13, Springer, 2014, pp. 740–755. 28 [9] M. Everingham, L. Van Gool, C. K. Williams, J. Winn, A. Zisserman, The pascal visual object classes (voc) challenge, International journal of computer vision 88 (2010) 303–338. [10] H. Q. Nguyen, K. Lam, L. T. Le, H. H. Pham, D. Q. Tran, D. B. Nguyen, D. D. Le, C. M. Pham, H. T. Tong, D. H. Dinh, et al., Vindr-cxr: An open dataset of chest x-rays with radiologist’s annotations, Scientific Data 9 (1) (2022) 429. [11] M. Aljabri, M. AlAmir, M. AlGhamdi, M. Abdel-Mottaleb, F. Collado-Mesa, Towards a better understanding of annotation tools for medical imaging: a survey, Multimedia tools and applications 81 (18) (2022) 25877–25911. [12] A. K. Pujitha, J. Sivaswamy, Solution to overcome the sparsity issue of annotated data in medical domain, CAAI Transactions on Intelligence Technology 3 (3) (2018) 153–160. [13] P. Monkam, S. Jin, W. Lu, Annotation cost minimization for ultrasound image segmentation using cross-domain transfer learning, IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics 27 (4) (2023) 2015–2025. [14] S. Jang, H. Song, Y. J. Shin, J. Kim, J. Kim, K. W. Lee, S. S. Lee, W. Lee, S. Lee, K. H. Lee, Deep learning–based automatic detection algorithm for reducing overlooked lung cancers on chest radiographs, Radiology 296 (3) (2020) 652–661. [15] H. Choi, Z. Chen, X. Shi, T.-K. Kim, Semi-supervised object detection with object-wise contrastive learning and regression uncertainty, arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.02747 (2022). [16] S. Bhat, A. Mansoor, B. Georgescu, M. Zinnen, P. Sahu, A. B. Panam-bur, F. C. Ghesu, S. Grbic, A. Maier, Patch-clip-contrastive health record-image joint training with patch embedding loss, ResearchSquare Preprint (2025). [17] E. Pachetti, S. Colantonio, A systematic review of few-shot learning in medical imaging, Artificial intelligence in medicine 156 (2024) 102949. [18] F. C. Ghesu, B. Georgescu, A. Mansoor, Y. Yoo, D. Neumann, P. Patel, R. S. Vishwanath, J. M. Balter, Y. Cao, S. Grbic, et al., Contrastive 29 self-supervised learning from 100 million medical images with optional supervision, Journal of Medical Imaging 9 (6) (2022) 064503–064503. [19] P. Sloan, P. Clatworthy, E. Simpson, M. Mirmehdi, Automated radiol-ogy report generation: A review of recent advances, IEEE Reviews in Biomedical Engineering 18 (2024) 368–387. [20] F. Yu, M. Endo, R. Krishnan, I. Pan, A. Tsai, E. P. Reis, E. K. U. N. Fonseca, H. M. H. Lee, Z. S. H. Abad, A. Y. Ng, et al., Evaluating progress in automatic chest x-ray radiology report generation, Patterns 4 (9) (2023). [21] G. Liu, T.-M. H. Hsu, M. McDermott, W. Boag, W.-H. Weng, P. Szolovits, M. Ghassemi, Clinically accurate chest x-ray report gen-eration, in: Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, PMLR, 2019, pp. 249–269. [22] M. Lin, G. Holste, S. Wang, Y. Zhou, Y. Wei, I. Banerjee, P. Chen, T. Dai, Y. Du, N. C. Dvornek, et al., Cxr-lt 2024: A miccai challenge on long-tailed, multi-label, and zero-shot disease classification from chest x-ray, arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07984 (2025). [23] N. Carion, F. Massa, G. Synnaeve, N. Usunier, A. Kirillov, S. Zagoruyko, End-to-end object detection with transformers (2020). arXiv:2005. 12872 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.12872 

[24] A. Tafti, D. W. Byerly, X-ray radiographic patient positioning, Stat-Pearls (2020). [25] A. Galan-Cuenca, A. J. Gallego, M. Saval-Calvo, A. Pertusa, Few-shot learning for covid-19 chest x-ray classification with imbalanced data: an inter vs. intra domain study, Pattern Analysis and Applications 27 (3) (2024) 69. [26] J. Lian, J. Liu, S. Zhang, K. Gao, X. Liu, D. Zhang, Y. Yu, A structure-aware relation network for thoracic diseases detection and segmentation, IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 40 (8) (2021) 2042–2052. doi: 10.1109/TMI.2021.3070847 .30 [27] S. K. Zhou, H. Greenspan, C. Davatzikos, J. S. Duncan, B. Van Gin-neken, A. Madabhushi, J. L. Prince, D. Rueckert, R. M. Summers, A review of deep learning in medical imaging: Imaging traits, technology trends, case studies with progress highlights, and future promises, Pro-ceedings of the IEEE 109 (5) (2021) 820–838. doi:10.1109/JPROC. 2021.3054390 .[28] C. Lin, Y. Zheng, X. Xiao, J. Lin, et al., Cxr-refinedet: Single-shot refinement neural network for chest x-ray radiograph based on multiple lesions detection, Journal of Healthcare Engineering 2022 (2022). [29] E. Schwab, A. Gooßen, H. Deshpande, A. Saalbach, Localization of criti-cal findings in chest x-ray without local annotations using multi-instance learning, in: 2020 IEEE 17th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), 2020, pp. 1879–1882. doi:10.1109/ISBI45749.2020. 9098551 .[30] J. G. Nam, M. Kim, J. Park, E. J. Hwang, J. H. Lee, J. H. Hong, J. M. Goo, C. M. Park, Development and validation of a deep learn-ing algorithm detecting 10 common abnormalities on chest radiographs, European Respiratory Journal 57 (5) (2021). [31] J. Chiramal, P. Putha, T. Manoj, B. Reddy, P. Warier, Developing a novel deep learning based cavity detection algorithm for tuberculosis screening on chest xrays, in: AMERICAN JOURNAL OF TROPICAL MEDICINE AND HYGIENE, Vol. 99, AMER SOC TROP MED & HYGIENE 8000 WESTPARK DR, STE 130, MCLEAN, VA 22101 USA, 2018, pp. 642–642. [32] P. Putha, M. Tadepalli, B. Reddy, T. Raj, J. A. Chiramal, S. Govil, N. Sinha, M. KS, S. Reddivari, A. Jagirdar, et al., Can artificial in-telligence reliably report chest x-rays?: Radiologist validation of an al-gorithm trained on 2.3 million x-rays, arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.07455 (2018). [33] J. Gipson, V. Tang, J. Seah, H. Kavnoudias, A. Zia, R. Lee, B. Mitra, W. Clements, Diagnostic accuracy of a commercially available deep-learning algorithm in supine chest radiographs following trauma, The British Journal of Radiology 95 (1134) (2022) 20210979. 31 [34] Z. Zheng, Y. Zhu, H. Wu, L. Lv, G. Yu, S. Niu, Cross-domain few-shot chest x-ray recognition, in: 2024 5th International Conference on Computers and Artificial Intelligence Technology (CAIT), IEEE, 2024, pp. 224–229. [35] L. Lu, X. Cui, Z. Tan, Y. Wu, Medoptnet: Meta-learning framework for few-shot medical image classification, IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 21 (4) (2023) 725–736. [36] M. Moor, Q. Huang, S. Wu, M. Yasunaga, Y. Dalmia, J. Leskovec, C. Zakka, E. P. Reis, P. Rajpurkar, Med-flamingo: a multimodal medi-cal few-shot learner, in: Machine Learning for Health (ML4H), PMLR, 2023, pp. 353–367. [37] L. Ju, Y. Wu, W. Feng, Z. Yu, L. Wang, Z. Zhu, Z. Ge, Universal semi-supervised learning for medical image classification, in: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Inter-vention, Springer, 2024, pp. 355–365. [38] A. He, T. Li, Y. Zhao, J. Zhao, H. Fu, Open-set semi-supervised med-ical image classification with learnable prototypes and outlier filter, in: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer, 2024, pp. 492–501. [39] J. Liao, Y. Xu, H. Du, Q. DONG, Weakly-supervised 3d medical image segmentation using geometric prior and contrastive similarity, uS Patent App. 18/150,228 (Jul. 11 2024). [40] Z. Kuang, Z. Yan, L. Yu, Weakly supervised learning for multi-class medical image segmentation via feature decomposition, Computers in Biology and Medicine 171 (2024) 108228. [41] K. Li, Z. Qian, Y. Han, E. I.-C. Chang, B. Wei, M. Lai, J. Liao, Y. Fan, Y. Xu, Weakly supervised histopathology image segmentation with self-attention, Medical Image Analysis 86 (2023) 102791. [42] W. Zhang, J. Chen, C. Kanan, Insight: Explainable weakly-supervised medical image analysis, arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.02012 (2024). [43] R. Jiao, Y. Zhang, L. Ding, B. Xue, J. Zhang, R. Cai, C. Jin, Learning with limited annotations: a survey on deep semi-supervised learning for 32 medical image segmentation, Computers in Biology and Medicine 169 (2024) 107840. [44] S. Zhang, Z. Yu, L. Liu, X. Wang, A. Zhou, K. Chen, Group r-cnn for weakly semi-supervised object detection with points, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2022, pp. 9417–9426. [45] S. Wang, Z. Zhao, Z. Shen, B. Wang, Q. Wang, D. Shen, Improving self-supervised medical image pre-training by early alignment with human eye gaze information, IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging (2025). [46] J. Chen, H. Duan, X. Zhang, B. Gao, V. Grau, J. Han, From gaze to insight: bridging human visual attention and vision language model explanation for weakly-supervised medical image segmentation, IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging (2025). [47] K. Sohn, Z. Zhang, C.-L. Li, H. Zhang, C.-Y. Lee, T. Pfister, A simple semi-supervised learning framework for object detection, arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.04757 (2020). [48] M. Xu, Z. Zhang, H. Hu, J. Wang, L. Wang, F. Wei, X. Bai, Z. Liu, End-to-end semi-supervised object detection with soft teacher, in: Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, 2021, pp. 3060–3069. [49] Z. Li, Z. Zeng, Y. Liang, J.-G. Yu, Complete instances mining for weakly supervised instance segmentation, arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07633 (2024). [50] Q. Li, A. Arnab, P. H. Torr, Weakly- and semi-supervised panoptic segmentation, in: Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018. [51] J.-H. Lee, C. Kim, S. Sull, Weakly supervised segmentation of small buildings with point labels, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-tional Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021, pp. 7406–7415. [52] Y.-C. Chen, L. Li, L. Yu, A. El Kholy, F. Ahmed, Z. Gan, Y. Cheng, J. Liu, Uniter: Learning universal image-text representations (2019). 33 [53] N. Nguyen, J. Bi, A. Vosoughi, Y. Tian, P. Fazli, C. Xu, Oscar: Ob-ject state captioning and state change representation, arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17128 (2024). [54] Z. Li, X. Wu, H. Du, F. Liu, H. Nghiem, G. Shi, A survey of state of the art large vision language models: Benchmark evaluations and chal-lenges, in: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference (CVPR) Workshops, 2025, pp. 1587–1606. [55] A. Singh, V. Natarajan, M. Shah, Y. Jiang, X. Chen, D. Batra, D. Parikh, M. Rohrbach, Towards vqa models that can read, in: Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2019, pp. 8317–8326. [56] Y. Liu, H. Duan, Y. Zhang, B. Li, S. Zhang, W. Zhao, Y. Yuan, J. Wang, C. He, Z. Liu, et al., Mmbench: Is your multi-modal model an all-around player?, in: European conference on computer vision, Springer, 2024, pp. 216–233. [57] E. Reiter, A structured review of the validity of bleu, Computational Linguistics 44 (3) (2018) 393–401. [58] W. Yu, Z. Yang, L. Li, J. Wang, K. Lin, Z. Liu, X. Wang, L. Wang, Mm-vet: Evaluating large multimodal models for integrated capabilities, arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.02490 (2023). [59] J. Li, D. Li, C. Xiong, S. Hoi, Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and generation, in: International conference on machine learning, PMLR, 2022, pp. 12888– 12900. [60] J.-B. Alayrac, J. Donahue, P. Luc, A. Miech, I. Barr, Y. Hasson, K. Lenc, A. Mensch, K. Millican, M. Reynolds, et al., Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning, Advances in neural information processing systems 35 (2022) 23716–23736. [61] Z. Peng, W. Wang, L. Dong, Y. Hao, S. Huang, S. Ma, F. Wei, Kosmos-2: Grounding multimodal large language models to the world, arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14824 (2023). 34 [62] R. Windsor, A. Jamaludin, T. Kadir, A. Zisserman, Vision-language modelling for radiological imaging and reports in the low data regime, in: I. Oguz, J. Noble, X. Li, M. Styner, C. Baumgartner, M. Rusu, T. Hein-mann, D. Kontos, B. Landman, B. Dawant (Eds.), Medical Imaging with Deep Learning, Vol. 227 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, PMLR, 2024, pp. 53–73. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v227/windsor24a.html 

[63] F. Shakeri, Y. Huang, J. Silva-Rodriguez, H. Bahig, A. Tang, J. Dolz, I. Ben Ayed, Few-shot Adaptation of Medical Vision-Language Mod-els , in: proceedings of Medical Image Computing and Computer As-sisted Intervention – MICCAI 2024, Vol. LNCS 15012, Springer Nature Switzerland, 2024. [64] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, L. Fei-Fei, Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database, in: 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, Ieee, 2009, pp. 248–255. [65] J. P. Cohen, J. D. Viviano, P. Bertin, P. Morrison, P. Torabian, M. Guar-rera, M. P. Lungren, A. Chaudhari, R. Brooks, M. Hashir, H. Bertrand, TorchXRayVision: A library of chest X-ray datasets and models, in: Medical Imaging with Deep Learning, 2022. URL https://github.com/mlmed/torchxrayvision 

[66] Z. Zheng, X. Feng, H. Yu, X. Li, M. Gao, Unsupervised few-shot im-age classification via one-vs-all contrastive learning, Applied Intelligence 53 (7) (2023) 7833–7847. [67] Z. Zheng, Y. Zhu, H. Wu, L. Lv, S. Niu, G. Yu, Sge: Semantic-guided generalization enhancement for few-shot learning, Knowledge-Based Systems (2025) 113761. [68] H. Wu, Y. Zhao, J. Li, Invariant and consistent: Unsupervised repre-sentation learning for few-shot visual recognition, Neurocomputing 520 (2023) 1–14. [69] Z. Zheng, H. Wu, L. Lv, D. Bardou, S. Niu, G. Yu, Merge: multimodal-enhanced representation and guided ensemble for pneumonia recognition in chest x-ray images: Z. zheng et al., The Journal of Supercomputing 81 (8) (2025) 907. 35 [70] H. Wu, Z. Zheng, L. Lv, C. Zhang, D. Bardou, S. Niu, G. Yu, Dara: distribution-aware representation alignment for semi-supervised domain adaptation in image classification, The Journal of Supercomputing 81 (2) (2025) 376. [71] R. Wang, G. Zheng, Pfmnet: Prototype-based feature mapping network for few-shot domain adaptation in medical image segmentation, Com-puterized Medical Imaging and Graphics 116 (2024) 102406. [72] S. Bhat, A. Mansoor, B. Georgescu, A. B. Panambur, F. C. Ghesu, S. Islam, K. Packhäuser, D. Rodríguez-Salas, S. Grbic, A. Maier, Au-creshaping: improved sensitivity at high-specificity, Scientific Reports 13 (1) (2023) 21097. [73] Z. Liu, Y. Lin, Y. Cao, H. Hu, Y. Wei, Z. Zhang, S. Lin, B. Guo, Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, 2021, pp. 10012–10022. [74] D. Marin, J.-H. R. Chang, A. Ranjan, A. Prabhu, M. Rastegari, O. Tuzel, Token pooling in vision transformers for image classification, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter conference on applications of computer vision, 2023, pp. 12–21. [75] F. Yang, K. Wu, S. Zhang, G. Jiang, Y. Liu, F. Zheng, W. Zhang, C. Wang, L. Zeng, Class-aware contrastive semi-supervised learning, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 14421–14430. [76] L. Van der Maaten, G. Hinton, Visualizing data using t-sne., Journal of machine learning research 9 (11) (2008). [77] K. Chen, J. Wang, J. Pang, Y. Cao, Y. Xiong, X. Li, S. Sun, W. Feng, Z. Liu, J. Xu, et al., Mmdetection: Open mmlab detection toolbox and benchmark, arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.07155 (2019). [78] H. Miller, The froc curve: A representation of the observer’s performance for the method of free response, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 46 (6B) (1969) 1473–1476. 36 [79] H. H. Pham, H. Q. Nguyen, H. T. Nguyen, L. T. Le, L. Khanh, An accurate and explainable deep learning system improves interobserver agreement in the interpretation of chest radiograph, IEEE Access 10 (2022) 104512–104531. [80] L. Lu, S. Miao, L. Ye, Fracture detection and localization in chest x-rays using semi-supervised learning with dynamic sharpening, in: ICASSP 2022 - 2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2022, pp. 1271–1275. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP43922.2022.9746079 .[81] Q. Zhang, X. Kong, Design of automatic lung nodule detection system based on multi-scene deep learning framework, IEEE Access 8 (2020) 90380–90389. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2993872 .[82] L. Maier-Hein, A. Reinke, P. Godau, M. D. Tizabi, F. Buettner, E. Christodoulou, B. Glocker, F. Isensee, J. Kleesiek, M. Kozubek, et al., Metrics reloaded: recommendations for image analysis validation, Na-ture methods 21 (2) (2024) 195–212. [83] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, P. Dollár, Focal loss for dense object detection, in: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2017, pp. 2980–2988. [84] C. Lyu, W. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Zhou, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, S. Zhang, K. Chen, Rtmdet: An empirical study of designing real-time object detectors, arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.07784 (2022). [85] R. Girshick, Fast r-cnn, in: Proceedings of the IEEE international con-ference on computer vision, 2015, pp. 1440–1448. 37