Title: AWM: Answerable Working Memory for Long-Document VQA Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.25618v1

Published Time: Thu, 27 Aug 2026 00:50:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# AWM: Answerable Working Memory for Long-Document VQA Agents 

Dongzhuoran Zhou 1,5,* , Yuqicheng Zhu 2,5 , Yule Liu 3,* , Zhen Yang 4,Rui Lu 4, Yuxiao Dong 4, Jie Tang 4, Evgeny Kharlamov 1,5 

> 1

University of Oslo, 2University of Stuttgart 

> 3

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 

> 4

Tsinghua University, 5Bosch Center for AI 

Abstract 

Long-document visual question answering in-creasingly relies on VLM agents that retrieve candidate pages, inspect page images, write findings to working memory, and synthesize an-swers. Working memory should carry answer-supporting evidence across page inspections for later grounded answering, yet existing eval-uation mainly checks final-answer correctness and evidence-page access. This creates a memory-quality blind spot: an agent may reach the right page and answer correctly while leav-ing behind memory too generic or incomplete to support answering once page context is re-moved. We introduce memory-only answerabil-ity , a diagnostic that asks whether a reader can answer from the question and terminal working memory alone. Building on this diagnostic, An-swerable Working Memory (AWM) treats termi-nal working memory as an answerable evidence artifact, and AWM-GRPO incorporates this sig-nal into the GRPO reward while preserving final-answer priority. Under GRPO, this reward assigns higher advantages to answer-correct trajectories whose terminal working memory remains answerable. On MML ONG BENCH -DOC , even when gold evidence pages are pro-vided, 42.5% of correct answers still cannot be answered from terminal working memory alone. AWM-GRPO improves final-answer ac-curacy over the RAG baseline by 8.1 and 11.9 points on MML ONG BENCH -D OC and L ONG -DOC URL and reduces the memory-missing-correct rate by 2.7 points over answer-only GRPO. 

1 Introduction 

Answering questions over long documents resem-bles goal-directed information seeking: a reader searches for relevant evidence, keeps intermedi-ate findings available, and integrates them into an 

> *Corresponding authors. Code is available at github.com/DongzhuoranZhou/AWM

answer. Recent long-document VQA systems in-stantiate a similar loop with VLM agents: they retrieve candidate pages, inspect page images, up-date working memory with findings, and synthe-size a final answer (Faysse et al., 2025; Yu et al., 2025; Cho et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2026; Lin et al., 2026; Lim et al., 2026). Working memory should carry answer-supporting evidence across page inspections for later grounded answering. Yet current evaluation checks final-answer correctness and evidence-page access, but not whether terminal working memory remains answer-supporting. An agent may therefore answer correctly from page context while leaving behind memory too generic to support the answer on its own. We introduce memory-only answerability : areader receives only the question and the agent-written terminal working memory, without page images or trajectory context, and must answer from that memory alone. This exposes a memory-quality gap: even when gold evidence pages are supplied, 42.5% of correctly answered MML ONG BENCH -DOC examples fail memory-only answerability. A controlled memory comparison further shows that improving terminal working memory improves an-swering, motivating optimization of the memory artifact itself. Motivated by this observation, we propose AWM-GRPO. For each trajectory, the agent out-puts a final answer and terminal working memory. A frozen reader answers from the question and ter-minal working memory alone, and a judge scores both the final answer and the memory-only answer. Under GRPO, this reward ranks trajectories by both final-answer correctness and memory answerabil-ity, creating a preference for trajectories that an-swer correctly with answerable terminal working memory. We evaluate a controlled training pipeline in which the three AWM-Agent variants share the same Qwen3-VL-4B policy, RAG Top-3 retrieval arXiv:2608.25618v1 [cs.CL] 26 Aug 2026 harness, tools, memory schema, prompts, and optimizer; only post-training and reward dif-fer. We compare direct input, RAG Top-3, SFT, answer-only GRPO, and AWM-GRPO. On MML ONG BENCH -D OC /L ONG DOC URL, AWM-GRPO exceeds RAG Top-3 by 8.1/11.9 points, SFT by 4.7/4.4 points, and answer-only GRPO by 2.3/2.7 points. It also reduces the memory-missing-correct rate by 2.7 points over answer-only GRPO on MML ONG BENCH -D OC (Sec. 4.3). This paper makes three contributions. (1) We identify a memory-quality gap in long-document VQA agents: final-answer correct-ness and evidence-page access do not deter-mine whether terminal working memory preserves answer-supporting evidence. (2) We propose AWM-GRPO, which uses memory-only answer-ability as a GRPO reward signal and ranks trajec-tories by both final-answer correctness and mem-ory answerability, creating a preference for answer-correct trajectories with answerable terminal work-ing memory. (3) We evaluate AWM-GRPO against direct-input, RAG, SFT, and answer-only GRPO baselines, showing improvements in both final-answer accuracy and memory-quality diagnostics. 

2 Agent Setup and Memory-Quality Motivation 

This section introduces the agent-memory frame-work and the memory-only answerability metrics used throughout the paper. It then presents two diagnostics: current agent-written memory is often insufficient even when page access is controlled, and improving terminal working memory improves answering. 

Agent-memory framework. A long-document VQA instance is a tuple (D, q, y ), where D =

{p1, . . . , p N } is a multi-page document, q is a ques-tion, and y is the ground-truth answer; when avail-able, E ⊆ D denotes gold evidence pages. The policy π uses evidence-page retrieval and mem-ory update. A retrieval call returns candidate page images directly in the observation; after inspect-ing these images, the agent must append a source-linked finding to working memory Mt. The inter-action proceeds until the agent outputs both a final answer ˆy and terminal working memory M term , or reaches a step budget (Figure 1a). As illustrated in Figure 1a, memory entries are source-linked findings whose quality depends on whether they preserve question-relevant evidence.           

> Final answer Memory answerable Case name correct yes memory-supported correct correct no memory-missing correct
> wrong yes answering error wrong no unresolved error

Table 1: Outcome cases induced by final-answer cor-rectness and memory-only answerability. 

A generic description such as “the chart shows trends” is less useful than a question-specific find-ing such as “the 2020 self-sufficiency rate is 4.7%.” 

Memory-only answerability. To measure whether terminal working memory M term alone supports answering, we evaluate memory-only answerability : a frozen reader R receives only the question q and M term , without the trajectory or page images, and produces a memory-only answer 

R(q, M term ). The official judge J evaluates both the agent’s final answer and the reader’s memory-only answer against the gold answer y.For the reported four-cell analysis, we map any positive score from J to 1 and zero to 0. This gives two binary scores per instance: final-answer cor-rectness sans = 1[J(ˆ y, y ) > 0] and memory-only answerability smem = 1[J(R(q, M term ), y ) > 0] .Implementation details for R and J appear in Appendix B. The pair (sans , s mem ) partitions instances into four cases (Table 1). The focal case is memory-missing correct (MMC): sans = 1 and smem = 0 ,i.e., the agent answered correctly but its terminal working memory alone does not support answer-ing. We summarize each run with Pmmc =P     

> i1[s(i)ans =1 ∧s(i)mem =0]
> P
> i1[s(i)ans =1]

, the fraction of final-answer-correct instances whose terminal working mem-ory is not answerable. Conditioning on sans =1 

removes general answer failure as a confound and asks whether memory remains insufficient even after the agent answered correctly. 

Current memory quality. We measure Pmmc 

on a fixed 500-example answerable subset of MML ONG BENCH -D OC (excluding the bench-mark’s unanswerable questions). The full multi-turn setting runs the agent end-to-end with its own retrieval and memory-update process. The 

evidence-page-given (EP-given) setting replaces re-trieval with gold evidence pages, so page access is controlled and retrieval is no longer a confound. Table 2 reports the results. (a) Multi-turn agent-memory framework         

> page
> retrieval
> update
> memory
> q
> ŷ
> Mterm
> append finding
> Mterm
> = [ {source_page: p i, finding: "..."}, {source_page: p j, finding: "..."}, ... ]
> ŷ= final answer Mterm
> = terminal working memory
> (b) Memory-quality diagnostics
> (i) Standard evaluation
> agent ŷjudge J
> gold y
> sans
> Mterm
> (ii) Memory-only answerability
> q,
> Mterm reader R ŷMjudge J
> gold y
> smem
> (iii) Controlled comparison
> memory
> gold pages
> empty
> original
> improved
> reader R
> ŷempty
> ŷorig
> ŷimp

Figure 1: Combined agent-memory framework and memory-quality diagnostics. (a) The agent retrieves page images, writes source-linked findings to working memory, and outputs both a final answer and terminal working memory. (b) Standard evaluation scores the final answer, memory-only evaluation asks whether the question can be answered from terminal working memory alone, and the controlled comparison varies terminal working memory while holding evidence-page access fixed.               

> Setting N
> Final-ans. acc. (%) Memory-only acc. (%) MMC / correct Pmmc (%) Full multi-turn 500 33.4 27.4 43 / 172 25.0 EP-given 500 36.2 30.2 77 / 181 42.5

Table 2: Memory-quality diagnostic for the Base AWM-Agent (Qwen3-VL-4B, no post-training) on a fixed 500-example answerable MML ONG BENCH -D OC sub-set. Unanswerable questions are excluded. Accu-racy follows the official mean per-question score; for MMC/correct and Pmmc , we binarize the official score by treating a positive score as correct. 

In the full multi-turn setting, one in four correct trajectories ( Pmmc = 25 .0% ) leaves behind termi-nal working memory that cannot support answering on its own. The EP-given setting controls for page access by replacing retrieval with gold evidence pages; Pmmc rises to 42 .5% , showing that page access and final-answer correctness do not imply answerable terminal working memory. 

Controlled memory comparison. We next ask whether higher-quality memory improves answer-ing. We construct a controlled setting in which retrieval returns gold evidence pages and compare three terminal-memory variants: (1) empty mem-ory ; (2) original agent memory ; and (3) improved memory , generated from the same gold pages by a stronger model. To isolate memory quality, the comparison keeps gold-page access and the eval-uation protocol fixed while substituting different terminal working memories. The answer gener-ator, memory-only reader, and judge are shared across conditions, so only terminal-memory con-

Memory condition Final-ans. binary rate Memory-only binary rate Empty memory 2.8 2.6 Original agent memory (4B) 36.2 30.2 Improved memory (GPT-4o) 44.4 44.8 

Table 3: Controlled memory comparison on a fixed 500-example MML ONG BENCH -D OC EP-given answer-able subset. The reader and scorer are fixed; only the terminal-memory condition changes. Improved memory is produced by GPT-4o. 

tent changes (Figure 1b). Appendix D gives the full setup, confidence intervals, outcome-cell break-down, and artifact audit. Table 3 isolates the role of terminal mem-ory. With empty memory, both final-answer and memory-only binary rates are near zero. Reusing the 4B agent’s original memory yields final-answer and memory-only binary rates of 36.2 and 30.2, while GPT-4o-improved memory raises them to 44.4 and 44.8. Improving terminal memory alone therefore improves both readouts with the answer generator, reader, and judge held fixed. 

Takeaway. Page access and final-answer correctness do not guarantee answerable terminal working memory. Memory-only answerability exposes this gap, and the controlled comparison shows that improving terminal working memory alone can improve answering. 

3 Optimizing Answerable Working Memory with GRPO 

Sec. 2 identifies the failure mode that AWM-GRPO targets: trajectories can answer correctly while Rollout and memory-only scoring    

> policy πθ
> rollout group
> {τ 1...τ G}
> ŷ
> Mterm reader RŷM
> gold yjudge J
> sans
> smem
> q
> AWM-GRPO
> policy update

Figure 2: Overview of AWM-GRPO. For each sampled trajectory, the agent produces both a final answer and terminal working memory. A frozen reader answers from the terminal working memory alone, and a frozen scorer evaluates the final answer and the memory-only answer. The two scores define the AWM reward, which is normalized within each GRPO group to update the policy. 

leaving terminal working memory unanswerable. Since GRPO updates the policy through group-relative advantages, the reward should make this memory-quality distinction visible in the advantage ranking. We first specify the desired advantage be-havior, then instantiate a four-cell reward that real-izes it, and finally use synthetic outcome mixtures to show how the induced preferences change with group composition. 

3.1 Desired advantage behavior under GRPO 

For each prompt, GRPO (Shao et al., 2024) sam-ples G trajectories and normalizes each trajectory’s reward within the group: 

Ai = r(τi) − μg

σg + ϵ ,

where μg and σg are the group mean and standard deviation and ϵ = 10 −6 stabilizes zero-variance groups. Because GRPO updates through these nor-malized advantages, what matters is not the raw reward scale but the ordering it induces: for any two outcome cells z, z ′,

Az − Az′ = rz − rz′

σg + ϵ .

The reward ordering therefore determines the ad-vantage ordering. We design the AWM reward to induce three pairwise preferences: 

Memory refinement. Among answer-correct tra-jectories, those whose terminal working memory remains answerable should receive higher advan-tage than those whose memory is not answerable. 

Final-answer gate. Final-answer correctness re-mains primary: an answer-correct but memory-imperfect trajectory should still outrank an answer-wrong trajectory, even if the latter leaves answer-able memory. 

Useful-memory failure. An answer-wrong tra-jectory with answerable memory is not success, but it is less severe than complete failure, because useful evidence was preserved. GRPO gives positive advantage only to cells whose reward exceeds the current group mean. The same cell can therefore change role as group composition changes: answer-correct but memory-imperfect trajectories may be tolerated when most samples fail, but become disfavored once memory-supported-correct trajectories are common. For-mally, Az > 0 iff rz > μ g.

3.2 AWM reward instantiation 

To realize these preferences with a minimal scalar reward, we reuse the two binary variables from Sec. 2: final-answer correctness sans and memory-only answerability smem . During online training, a frozen local Qwen3-14B model generates the memory-only answer and scores both answers for the reward. The official judge J from Sec. 2 is used for reported diagnostics. The AWM reward is defined over the resulting four outcome cells: 

r11 = β, r10 = 0 , r01 = γ, r00 = ω, β > 0 > γ > ω. 

We write RAWM (sans , s mem ) = rsans smem ; the answer-only baseline uses Rans (sans ) = sans .Here β is the reward for full success (memory-supported correct), γ is the reward for answer-wrong but memory-answerable trajectories, and 

ω is the reward for complete failure. The an-chor r10 = 0 fixes answer-correct but memory-imperfect trajectories. The resulting normalized margins are:                            

> Preference Margin Ranking Memory refinement A11 −A10 =β/ (σg+ϵ)(1 ,1) ≻(1 ,0)
> Final-answer gate A10 −A01 =−γ/ (σg+ϵ)(1 ,0) ≻(0 ,1)
> Useful-memory failure A01 −A00 = ( γ−ω)/(σg+ϵ) (0 ,1) ≻(0 ,0)

The memory-refinement margin is exactly what answer-only reward cannot express: it scores (1 , 1) 

and (1 , 0) identically, collapsing Aans 11 = Aans 10 .Each cell’s advantage sign depends on the group mean ( Az > 0 iff rz > μ g): 

Cell Positive iff Interpretation 

(1 , 1) μg < β full success favored 

(1 , 0) μg < 0 flips at μg =0 (0 , 1) μg < γ flips at μg =γ

(0 , 0) never zero only if μg =ω

The main experiments instantiate β = 2 , γ =

−0.1, and ω = −1, yielding (r11 , r 10 , r 01 , r 00 ) = (2 , 0, −0.1, −1) . Under this default, the wrong-answer but memory-answerable cell (r01 =γ=−0.1) is slightly below the answer-correct / memory-imperfect cell ( r10 =0 ), so it becomes negative first as the group mean rises. When the group mean exceeds r10 , the answer-correct / memory-imperfect cell also becomes negative and positive advantage concentrates on full success. This gives the reward an answer-first, memory-refinement-later tendency without implying a de-terministic curriculum guarantee. 

3.3 Advantage distributions under synthetic outcome mixtures 

Figure 3 uses a controlled Monte Carlo simulation to show how the answer-only and AWM rewards translate into GRPO advantages. For each row, we fix a categorical distribution over the four out-come cells of Table 1 and draw 15,000 independent GRPO groups, each containing 8 trajectories. The answer-only simulation samples from the corre-sponding final-answer marginal, while the AWM simulation samples the four cells directly. Rows increase p11 , the probability of memory-supported correct (1 , 1) , so later rows contain more memory-supported correct trajectories. The simulation uses the default reward instantiation β = 2 , γ = −0.1,

ω = −1. It isolates reward-induced group-relative preferences; curves are smoothed for visualiza-tion only. Implementation details appear in Ap-pendix C. 

Three effects are visible: 

• Answer-only hides memory quality : in the left column, trajectories are grouped only by final-answer correctness, so Ans ✓ Mem ✓ and 012       

> p11  = 0.08
> 012
> p11  = 0.30
> 202
> normalized advantage
> 012
> p11  = 0.60
> 202
> normalized advantage
> Answer-only GRPO
> Ans× (reward 0) Ans (reward 1)
> AWM-GRPO
> Ans× Mem× Ans× Mem
> Ans Mem×
> Ans Mem

Figure 3: Simulated GRPO advantage distributions. Each row samples synthetic groups of size G=8 from a four-cell outcome mixture; p11 is the probability of memory-supported correct (1 , 1) . Left: answer-only reward collapses the four cells into answer-wrong and answer-correct regions. Right: AWM assigns a distinct raw reward to each of the four cells before group nor-malization. 

Ans ✓ Mem × are learned together as a single answer-correct region; memory answerability is invisible. • AWM distinguishes the answer-correct cells :in the right column, Ans ✓ Mem × and Ans ✓

Mem ✓ receive distinct raw rewards and can therefore receive different normalized advan-tages. This is the memory-refinement prefer-ence missing from answer-only reward. • The preference changes with group compo-sition : as p11 increases, the red Ans ✓ Mem ×

curve moves below zero while the blue Ans ✓

Mem ✓ curve remains positive. The nearby green Ans × Mem ✓ curve is expected because 

r01 =−0.1 is close to r10 =0 ; the key compari-son is between the two answer-correct cells. 

What the reward does not claim. The reward uses memory-only answerability as a training sig-nal, not as a claim of full source-grounding verifi-cation. It requires no gold terminal working mem-ory: the frozen reader R answers from the agent-written M term , and the frozen training scorer eval-uates both the agent’s final answer and the memory-only answer against the gold answer. The reward does not score memory style, length, or formatting, and memory-only answerability does not override final-answer correctness; r10 > r 01 preserves final-answer priority. Appendix C discusses reward vari-ants, simulation details, and why we adopt this minimal form. 

4 Experiments 

We evaluate whether AWM-GRPO improves final-answer accuracy and terminal-working-memory quality over direct-input, RAG, SFT, and answer-only GRPO baselines. 

4.1 Experimental Setup Benchmarks. We evaluate on LONG -DOC URL (Deng et al., 2025) (N =2325 )and MML ONG BENCH -D OC (Ma et al., 2024) (N =1082 ), under each benchmark’s official evaluation protocol (Appendix A). 

Metrics. We report final-answer accuracy, memory-only accuracy, and Pmmc from Sec. 2. Both final and memory-only answers are evaluated by the official judge J defined in Sec. 2. The judge uses GPT-4o to extract a concise candidate answer and then applies each benchmark’s deterministic rules to compute generalized accuracy. 

Agent and retrieval harness. The policy is Qwen3-VL-4B-Instruct served via SGLang. The agent runs the retrieve-inspect-update memory loop of Sec. 2 with an append-only mandatory memory-update policy and a maximum of 15 agent steps per question. Page retrieval uses Jina v4 page-image embeddings indexed by Qdrant, returning the top three candidate pages per query (RAG Top-3). 

Post-training data. SFT and GRPO use post-training prompts from D OC -750K (Duan et al., 2025), disjoint from the evaluation sets. A 2000 -question rendered subset yields 994 SFT trajecto-ries via difficulty-balanced bucket sampling, with kimi-k2.5 as the teacher; the remaining 1006 ques-tions form the RL-unseen pool, from which 226 

mixed-difficulty groups are retained for GRPO training. Online GRPO uses a frozen, locally hosted Qwen3-14B model to generate the memory-only answer and compute both reward scores; only the 4B policy is updated. 

Variants. We evaluate two no-memory baselines and three AWM-Agent variants. The direct-input 

baseline receives all document pages in one pass, without retrieval, tools, or terminal working mem-ory. The second, VLM + RAG Top-3 , retrieves the top three pages and answers directly without writ-ing terminal working memory. The three AWM-Agent variants share the same model, tools, mem-ory schema, retrieval harness, prompts, and opti-mizer; only the post-training step or reward dif-fers: (i) AWM-Agent (SFT) : trained on the 994 -trajectory D OC -750K subset. (ii) AWM-Agent + Answer-GRPO : the SFT checkpoint with GRPO un-der the answer-only reward Rans . (iii) AWM-Agent + AWM-GRPO : the SFT checkpoint with GRPO under the AWM reward RAWM at default values 

(2 , 0, −0.1, −1) (Sec. 3.2). 

4.2 Main Results 

Table 4 reports final-answer accuracy for external baselines and our variants. The external rows use different backbones and published protocols, so they provide context rather than controlled com-parisons. Our method comparisons use the five Qwen3-VL-4B rows, which share the backbone and official scoring protocol. The direct-input and RAG rows provide no-memory baselines, while Sec. 4.3 analyzes mem-ory quality only for methods that produce termi-nal working memory. On MML ONG BENCH -D OC ,AWM-GRPO reaches 53.9 and improves over di-rect input, RAG Top-3, SFT, and answer-only GRPO by 10.4, 8.1, 4.7, and 2.3 points, respec-tively. It also improves over RAG Top-3, SFT, and answer-only GRPO by 11.9, 4.4, and 2.7 points on LONG DOC URL. 

4.3 Analysis Memory-quality analysis. Tables 5 and 6 report memory-quality metrics across the three AWM-Agent variants on MML ONG BENCH -D OC . The direct-input and RAG baselines are excluded be-cause they do not produce terminal working mem-ory. Table 5 uses the full multi-turn setting; Table 6 uses the EP-given setting, where retrieval is re-placed by gold evidence pages to isolate memory extraction from page access. SFT already achieves a relatively low Pmmc of 17.7%. Answer-only GRPO improves final-answer accuracy but raises Pmmc to 19.9%, because it as-signs the same reward to memory-supported cor-rect and memory-missing correct trajectories; its effect on memory quality is incidental. AWM-GRPO separates these two cells through the AWM reward (Sec. 3). Compared with answer-only GRPO, AWM-GRPO improves memory-only ac-curacy from 42.5 to 44.5 and reduces Pmmc from Method Backbone Param Paradigm MML ONG BENCH -D OC LONG DOC URL 

Open-source / RAG 

Qwen2.5-VL (Zheng et al., 2026) Qwen2.5-VL 7B VLM 28.0 32.9 SV-RAG (Chen et al., 2024) InternVL2 4B RAG 23.0 –M3DocRAG (Cho et al., 2024) Qwen2-VL 7B RAG 21.0 35.1 VisRAG (Yu et al., 2025) MiniCPM-V 8B RAG 18.8 41.9 MoLoRAG (Wu et al., 2025) Qwen2.5-VL 7B RAG 41.0 51.9 URaG-7B (Shi et al., 2026) Qwen2.5-VL 7B RAG 33.8 52.2 

Agentic / RL 

VRAG-RL (Wang et al., 2025) Qwen2.5-VL 7B Agent + RL 26.6 44.9 Doc-V ⋆ (SFT) (Zheng et al., 2026) Qwen2.5-VL 7B Agent + SFT 39.8 53.0 Doc-V ⋆ (GRPO) (Zheng et al., 2026) Qwen2.5-VL 7B Agent + GRPO 42.1 56.3 

Ours (Qwen3-VL-4B) 

Qwen3-VL-4B (direct input) Qwen3-VL 4B VLM 43.5 –VLM + RAG Top-3 (no memory) Qwen3-VL 4B RAG 45.8 48.2 AWM-Agent (SFT) Qwen3-VL 4B Agent + SFT 49.2 55.7 + Answer-GRPO Qwen3-VL 4B GRPO ( Rans ) 51.6 57.4 + AWM-GRPO Qwen3-VL 4B GRPO ( RAWM ) 53.9 60.1 

Table 4: Final-answer accuracy; higher is better. External rows follow their reported protocols and provide context only. Our five Qwen3-VL-4B rows use the official scoring protocol. 

Variant Final acc. Mem acc. Pmmc (%) SFT 40.8 38.5 17.7 + Answer-GRPO 43.2 42.5 19.9 + AWM-GRPO 45.4 44.5 17.2 

Table 5: Memory-quality analysis of the three AWM-Agent variants on 1,082 MML ONG BENCH -D OC trajec-tories in the full multi-turn setting. 

Variant Subset Final acc. Mem acc. 

Pmmc 

(%) + Answer-GRPO MM EP 45.4 41.2 19.1 + AWM-GRPO MM EP 48.0 43.5 16.4 

Table 6: Memory-quality analysis of Answer-GRPO and AWM-GRPO on 733 answerable MML ONG BENCH -DOC examples in the EP-given setting. 

19.9% to 17.2%, while also improving final-answer accuracy. AWM-GRPO also improves both final-answer and memory-only accuracy over SFT (+4.6 and +6.0 points) while keeping Pmmc slightly lower (17.2 vs. 17.7). The targeted failure is narrow: af-ter a relevant page is observed, the agent must commit a question-conditioned finding to mem-ory. AWM-GRPO supplies trajectory-level reward for this terminal-working-memory artifact, rather than changing retrieval tools or the answer prompt. Table 6 reports the EP-given comparison: with retrieval replaced by gold evidence pages, AWM-GRPO improves final-answer accuracy from 45.4 to 48.0, memory-only accuracy from 41.2 to 43.5, and reduces Pmmc from 19.1% to 16.4% relative to answer-only GRPO, showing that the memory-40 160 280 

> Training step
> 36 38 40 42 44 46
> Memory-only accuracy (%)
> 38.8 40.4 43.5
> AWM-GRPO

Figure 4: AWM-GRPO memory-only accuracy over training steps on MML ONG BENCH -D OC . Memory-only accuracy increases from 38.8 at step 40 to 43.5 at step 280. 

aware reward remains beneficial even when page access is controlled. 

Training dynamics. We track memory-only ac-curacy across AWM-GRPO training steps on MML ONG BENCH -D OC . Figure 4 shows a mono-tonic increase from 38.8 at step 40 to 43.5 at step 280, suggesting that the reward progressively im-proves the answerability of terminal working mem-ory during training. 

Evidence-source analysis. Table 7 compares Answer-GRPO and AWM-GRPO by answer-source category. AWM-GRPO lowers Pmmc for mixed visual+text, text-multi, figure, chart, and none categories, while table and layout questions show higher Pmmc . This suggests that the mem-ory reward helps in several cross-source settings but does not uniformly solve structured-evidence Final acc. Pmmc (%) Source N Ans AWM Ans AWM Pure-text 135 46.1 58.5 22.8 23.1 Table 143 36.7 39.5 15.2 23.9 Chart 107 45.7 46.0 21.4 17.5 

Figure 187 41.0 43.9 20.3 16.2 

Layout 32 75.9 74.3 4.8 15.8 visual+text (mixed) 180 36.7 37.3 36.2 22.2 

visual (multi) 3 – – – –text (multi) 62 40.1 48.3 31.8 24.0 

none 233 47.5 49.2 10.4 5.4 

All 1082 43.2 45.4 19.9 17.2          

> Table 7: Evidence-source comparison on MML ONG BENCH -D OC in the full multi-turn setting. “Ans” denotes Answer-GRPO and “AWM” denotes AWM-GRPO; bold marks the better value within each source.

preservation. 

5 Related Work 

Long-document VQA agents. 

MML ONG BENCH -D OC (Ma et al., 2024) and L ONG DOC URL (Deng et al., 2025) are two recent benchmarks for long-document VQA over PDFs that average tens to hundreds of pages and mix textual, tabular, and figure-grounded ques-tions. Doc-V ⋆ treats this task as sequential page navigation: the agent starts from a low-resolution overview, fetches selected page images, and records findings in structured working memory be-fore answering (Zheng et al., 2026). Its navigation policy is trained with imitation learning and GRPO. MemSearcher studies compact working memory across turns in text-based search agents rather than page-image VQA, using multi-context GRPO to propagate trajectory-level advantages to individual turns (Yuan et al., 2025). AgenticRAG-R1 uses stack memory for multi-step reasoning, retrieval, and memorizing, while TC-RAG studies Turing-complete RAG for medical LLM systems (Jiang et al., 2026, 2025). SCAIR, GR-Agent, and EigentSearch structure retrieval or reasoning with schemas or tools (Chaturvedi et al., 2026; Zhou et al., 2025b; Zhang et al., 2026; Li et al., 2025). AWM keeps the agent architecture and memory format, but evaluates whether terminal memory is 

answerable on its own and uses that signal as an RL reward. 

Intermediate-state supervision. TableQA work filters questions and prunes tables to retain answer-critical content (Ye et al., 2026; Guo et al., 2026). For visual inputs, CapRL rewards answerable captions, while Vision-SR1 optimizes question-conditioned visual descriptions and answers (Xing et al., 2026; Li et al., 2026b,a; Xiao et al., 2026b, 2025). Perception-R1 checks visual content in a reasoning response against reference annota-tions (Xiao et al., 2026a). AWM instead evaluates the answerability of query-specific terminal work-ing memory accumulated across sequential page inspections. 

Memory evaluation. Evidence-citation work asks whether an agent’s final answer is supported by its cited evidence (Liu et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023). Related RAG work tests reasoning when retrieved knowledge is incomplete or exposes the argument structure behind an answer (Zhou et al., 2026a; Zhu et al., 2025b). Memory-only an-swerability asks whether saved memory is suffi-cient to answer after the page images and inter-action trajectory are removed, a question related to self-evaluation in retrieval-augmented genera-tion (Asai et al., 2024). Neither test subsumes the other: answerable memory may contain un-supported claims, while grounded memory may omit a fact needed to answer. Other diagnostics audit prompt-conditioned traces left by RLVR (Liu et al., 2025); they target data membership, not whether terminal memory supports answering. In our diagnostic, a frozen language model reads only 

(q, M term ) and produces a memory-only answer, which the official benchmark judge scores along-side the agent’s final answer. This reader-based di-agnostic is related to LLM-based evaluation (Zheng et al., 2023; Gilardi et al., 2023). Memory probes in interpretability (Ghandeharioun et al., 2024) ask whether internal activations encode a fact, whereas we ask whether an externalized, source-linked ter-minal record encodes it. 

6 Conclusion 

Memory-only answerability identifies cases in which an agent answers correctly but leaves ter-minal working memory that cannot support the an-swer on its own. AWM-GRPO improves accuracy over answer-only GRPO on both benchmarks and lowers Pmmc in both settings. Two benchmarks and one model size leave grounding unverified. Limitations 

All controlled AWM comparisons use Qwen3-VL-4B on L ONG DOC URL and MML ONG BENCH -DOC ; whether AWM-GRPO helps at 30B+ or on other document distributions, such as scientific pa-pers, financial filings, and slide decks, remains open. Memory-only answerability may depend on the frozen Qwen3-14B reader, and we did not test robustness with a second reader. Errors in the fixed judge’s answer-extraction step can affect the reported metrics. Our 100-example audit found six disagreements but no consistent direction of er-ror; a larger audit would provide stronger evidence. The AWM reward measures answerability, not full source-grounding verification; future work can add source-conditioned checks for individual memory claims. Memory-only answerability also requires an extra reader pass and an extraction pass during offline evaluation, although neither pass is needed when the trained agent is deployed. 

Ethics Statement 

This work uses publicly released benchmarks (MML ONG BENCH -D OC , L ONG DOC URL), a pub-lic open-weight VLM (Qwen3-VL-4B-Instruct), and a fixed local Qwen3-14B model for memory reading and reward scoring during online training. We collect no new data, do not work with human subjects, and do not target deployment. The official judge follows each benchmark’s answer-extraction and rule-based scoring pipeline. Separately, the controlled intervention in Appendix D uses GPT-4o to construct improved memory from gold evidence pages; those memories are not used for training. The fixed training scorer, reader, and answer ex-tractor may introduce systematic errors; our man-ual audit does not establish broader scoring robust-ness or claim-level source grounding. Per ARR / EMNLP policy, AI assistants were used for editing; all technical content is the authors’ own. 

References 

Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2024. Self-rag: Learning to re-trieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. In International conference on learning representa-tions , volume 2024, pages 9112–9141. Prateek Chaturvedi, Yuqicheng Zhu, Hongkuan Zhou, Dongzhuoran Zhou, Yunjie He, Steffen Staab, Fei Du, Jie Tang, and Evgeny Kharlamov. 2026. SCAIR: Schema-conditioned agentic iterative reasoning for enterprise knowledge graphs. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics (Volume 6: Industry Track) , pages 1089–1104. Jian Chen, Ruiyi Zhang, Yufan Zhou, Tong Yu, Franck Dernoncourt, Jiuxiang Gu, Ryan A. Rossi, Changyou Chen, and Tong Sun. 2024. Sv-rag: Lora-contextualizing adaptation of mllms for long document understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.01106 .Jaemin Cho, Debanjan Mahata, Ozan Irsoy, Yujie He, and Mohit Bansal. 2024. M3docrag: Multi-modal retrieval is what you need for multi-page multi-document understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04952 .Chao Deng, Jiale Yuan, Pi Bu, Peijie Wang, Zhong-Zhi Li, Jian Xu, Xiao-Hui Li, Yuan Gao, Jun Song, Bo Zheng, and Cheng-Lin Liu. 2025. Longdocurl: a comprehensive multimodal long document bench-mark integrating understanding, reasoning, and locat-ing. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1135–1159. Yuchen Duan, Zhe Chen, Yusong Hu, Weiyun Wang, Shenglong Ye, Botian Shi, Lewei Lu, Qibin Hou, Tong Lu, Hongsheng Li, Jifeng Dai, and Wenhai Wang. 2025. Docopilot: Improving multimodal mod-els for document-level understanding. In Proceed-ings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 4026–4037. Manuel Faysse, Hugues Sibille, Tony Wu, Bilel Omrani, Gautier Viaud, Céline Hudelot, and Pierre Colombo. 2025. Colpali: Efficient document retrieval with vision language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pages 61424–61449. Tianyu Gao, Howard Yen, Jiatong Yu, and Danqi Chen. 2023. Enabling large language models to generate text with citations. In Proceedings of the 2023 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 6465–6488. Asma Ghandeharioun, Avi Caciularu, Adam Pearce, Lucas Dixon, and Mor Geva. 2024. Patchscopes: A unifying framework for inspecting hidden rep-resentations of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06102 .Fabrizio Gilardi, Meysam Alizadeh, and Maël Kubli. 2023. Chatgpt outperforms crowd-workers for text-annotation tasks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 120(30):e2305016120. Yu Guo, Shenghao Ye, Shuangwu Chen, Zijian Wen, Tao Zhang, Qirui Bai, Dong Jin, Yunpeng Hou, Huasen He, Jianyang, and Xiaobin Tan. 2026. Re-thinking table pruning in TableQA: From sequential revisions to gold trajectory-supervised parallel search. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 12960–12976. Yuan He, Bailan He, Zifeng Ding, Alisia Maria Lupidi, Yuqicheng Zhu, Shuo Chen, Caiqi Zhang, Jiaoyan Chen, Yunpu Ma, Volker Tresp, and Ian Horrocks. 2025. Supposedly equivalent facts that aren’t? en-tity frequency in pre-training induces asymmetry in LLMs. In Second Conference on Language Model-ing .Xinke Jiang, Yue Fang, Rihong Qiu, Haoyu Zhang, Yongxin Xu, Hao Chen, Wentao Zhang, Ruizhe Zhang, Yuchen Fang, Xu Chu, and 1 others. 2025. TC-RAG: Turing-complete RAG’s case study on medical LLM systems. ACL oral 2025 .Xinke Jiang, Yue Fang, Zhibang Yang, Jiaran Gao, Zhixin Zhang, Tao Feng, Rihong Qiu, Wentao Zhang, Hongxin Ding, Ruizhe Zhang, and 1 others. 2026. Agenticrag-r1: Agentic reinforcement learning with stack memory for multi-step reasoning, retrieval and memorizing. In EMNLP .Songze Li, Xiaoke Guo, Tianqi Liu, Biao Yi, Zhaoyan Gong, Zhiqiang Liu, Huajun Chen, and Wen Zhang. 2026a. What’s missing in screen-to-action? towards a ui-in-the-loop paradigm for multimodal gui reason-ing. In Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: ACL 2026 , pages 17674–17690. Songze Li, Zhiqiang Liu, Zhengke Gui, Huajun Chen, and Wen Zhang. 2025. Enrich-on-graph: Query-graph alignment for complex reasoning with LLM enriching. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 7683–7703. Zongxia Li, Wenhao Yu, Chengsong Huang, Zhenwen Liang, Rui Liu, Fuxiao Liu, Jingxi Chen, Dian Yu, Jordan Lee Boyd-Graber, Haitao Mi, and Dong Yu. 2026b. Vision-SR1: Self-rewarding vision-language model via reasoning decomposition and multi-reward policy optimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Gyubeum Lim, Yemo Koo, and Vijay Krishna Madis-etti. 2026. Scope VLM: selective context processing for efficient document navigation in vision-language models. In Proceedings of the 19th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 95–140. Jiahang Lin, Kai Hu, Binghai Wang, Yuhao Zhou, Zhi-heng Xi, Honglin Guo, Shichun Liu, Junzhe Wang, Shihan Dou, Enyu Zhou, Hang Yan, Zhenhua Han, Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, and Xuanjing Huang. 2026. Mm-doc-r1: Training agents for long document visual question answering through multi-turn reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.13579 .Nelson F. Liu, Tianyi Zhang, and Percy Liang. 2023. Evaluating verifiability in generative search engines. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 7001–7025. Yule Liu, Heyi Zhang, Jinyi Zheng, Zhen Sun, Zifan Peng, Jiaheng Wei, Tianshuo Cong, Yilong Yang, and Xinlei He. 2025. Auditing data membership in reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.14045 .Yubo Ma, Yuhang Zang, Liangyu Chen, Meiqi Chen, Yizhu Jiao, Xinze Li, Xinyuan Lu, Ziyu Liu, Yan Ma, Xiaoyi Dong, Pan Zhang, Liangming Pan, Yu-Gang Jiang, Jiaqi Wang, Yixin Cao, and Aixin Sun. 2024. MMLONGBENCH-DOC: benchmarking long-context document understanding with visualiza-tions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:95963–96010. Nico Potyka, Yuqicheng Zhu, Yunjie He, Evgeny Khar-lamov, and Steffen Staab. 2024. Robust knowledge extraction from large language models using social choice theory. In Proceedings of the 23rd Interna-tional Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi-agent Systems , pages 1593–1601. Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. 2024. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathemat-ical reasoning in open language models. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2402.03300 , 2(3):5. Yongxin Shi, Jiapeng Wang, Zeyu Shan, Dezhi Peng, Zening Lin, and Lianwen Jin. 2026. Urag: Unified retrieval and generation in multimodal llms for effi-cient long document understanding. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 40, pages 25357–25365. Qiuchen Wang, Ruixue Ding, Yu Zeng, Zehui Chen, Lin Chen, Shihang Wang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, and Feng Zhao. 2025. VRAG-RL: empower vision-perception-based RAG for visually rich information understanding via iterative reasoning with reinforce-ment learning. CoRR , abs/2505.22019. Xixi Wu, Yanchao Tan, Nan Hou, Ruiyang Zhang, and Hong Cheng. 2025. Molorag: Bootstrapping doc-ument understanding via multi-modal logic-aware retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 14024–14045. Tong Xiao, Xin Xu, Zhenya Huang, Hongyu Gao, Quan Liu, Qi Liu, and Enhong Chen. 2026a. Perception-R1: Advancing multimodal reasoning capabilities of MLLMs via visual perception reward. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .Xi Xiao, Chen Liu, Chih-Ting Liao, Yunbei Zhang, Qizhen Lan, Yuxiang Wei, Lin Zhao, Janet Wang, Jianyang Gu, Muchao Ye, and 1 others. 2026b. Stay-ing VIGILant: Mitigating visual laziness via counter-factual visual alignment in MLLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.26387 .Xi Xiao, Yunbei Zhang, Xingjian Li, Tianyang Wang, Xiao Wang, Yuxiang Wei, Jihun Hamm, and Min Xu. 2025. Visual instance-aware prompt tuning. In Pro-ceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia , pages 2880–2889. Can Xie, Ruotong Pan, Xiangyu Wu, Yunfei Zhang, Jiayi Fu, Tingting Gao, and Guorui Zhou. 2026a. Un-locking exploration in RLVR: Uncertainty-aware ad-vantage shaping for deeper reasoning. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026 , pages 19057–19076. Can Xie, Yuyi Zhou, Wen Yang, Ziyi Zhang, Siyao Song, Yingzhuo Deng, Shuo Ren, and Jiajun Zhang. 2026b. EDGE: Experience-distillation for guided ex-ploration in agentic reinforcement learning. Preprint ,arXiv:2608.21946. Long Xing, Xiaoyi Dong, Yuhang Zang, Yuhang Cao, Jianze Liang, Qidong Huang, Jiaqi Wang, Feng Wu, and Dahua Lin. 2026. CapRL: Stimulating dense im-age caption capabilities via reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Shenghao Ye, Yu Guo, Dong Jin, Yuxiang Wang, Yikai Shen, Yunpeng Hou, Shuangwu Chen, Jianyang, and Xiaofeng Jiang. 2026. When TableQA meets noise: A dual denoising framework for complex questions and large-scale tables. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 24022– 24045. Shi Yu, Chaoyue Tang, Bokai Xu, Junbo Cui, Jun-hao Ran, Yukun Yan, Zhenghao Liu, Shuo Wang, Xu Han, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2025. Vis-rag: Vision-based retrieval-augmented generation on multi-modality documents. In International Con-ference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pages 21074–21098. Qianhao Yuan, Jie Lou, Zichao Li, Jiawei Chen, Yaojie Lu, Hongyu Lin, Le Sun, Debing Zhang, and Xianpei Han. 2025. Memsearcher: Training llms to reason, search and manage memory via end-to-end reinforce-ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.02805 .Boer Zhang, Mingyan Wu, Dongzhuoran Zhou, Yuqicheng Zhu, Wendong Fan, Puzhen Zhang, Zifeng Ding, Guohao Li, and Yuan He. 2026. EigentSearch-Q+: Enhancing deep research agents with structured reasoning tools. In Proceedings of the ACM Confer-ence on AI and Agentic Systems , pages 1114–1118. Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. In 

NeurIPS .Yuanlei Zheng, Pei Fu, Hang Li, Ziyang Wang, Yuyi Zhang, Wenyu Ruan, Xiaojin Zhang, Zhongyu Wei, Zhenbo Luo, Jian Luan, Wei Chen, and Xiang Bai. 2026. Doc-v*:coarse-to-fine interactive visual reasoning for multi-page document VQA. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.13731 .Dongzhuoran Zhou, Yuqicheng Zhu, Xiaxia Wang, Yuan He, Jiaoyan Chen, Steffen Staab, and Evgeny Kharlamov. 2025a. Evaluating knowledge graph based retrieval augmented generation methods un-der knowledge incompleteness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.05163 .Dongzhuoran Zhou, Yuqicheng Zhu, Xiaxia Wang, Hongkuan Zhou, Jiaoyan Chen, Steffen Staab, Yuan He, and Evgeny Kharlamov. 2025b. GR-Agent: Adaptive graph reasoning agent under incomplete knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.14766 .Dongzhuoran Zhou, Yuqicheng Zhu, Xiaxia Wang, Hongkuan Zhou, Yuan He, Jiaoyan Chen, Steffen Staab, and Evgeny Kharlamov. 2026a. What breaks knowledge graph based RAG? benchmarking and empirical insights into reasoning under incomplete knowledge. In Proceedings of the 19th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2522–2538. Yixiao Zhou, Dongzhou Cheng, Zhiliang Wu, Yi Yang, Yu Cheng, and Hehe Fan. 2026b. One refiner to unlock them all: Inference-time reasoning elicitation via reinforcement query refinement. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 38957–38978. Yixiao Zhou, Yang Li, Dongzhou Cheng, Hehe Fan, and Yu Cheng. 2026c. Look inward to explore out-ward: Learning temperature policy from LLM in-ternal states via hierarchical RL. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.13035 .Yuqicheng Zhu, Daniel Hernández, Yuan He, Zifeng Ding, Bo Xiong, Evgeny Kharlamov, and Steffen Staab. 2025a. Predicate-conditional conformalized answer sets for knowledge graph embeddings. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: ACL 2025 , pages 4145–4167. Yuqicheng Zhu, Nico Potyka, Daniel Hernández, Yuan He, Zifeng Ding, Bo Xiong, Dongzhuoran Zhou, Evgeny Kharlamov, and Steffen Staab. 2025b. Ar-gRAG: Explainable retrieval augmented generation using quantitative bipolar argumentation. In Pro-ceedings of the 19th International Conference on Neurosymbolic Learning and Reasoning , volume 284 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 697–718. PMLR. Yuqicheng Zhu, Nico Potyka, Mojtaba Nayyeri, Bo Xiong, Yunjie He, Evgeny Kharlamov, and Stef-fen Staab. 2024. Predictive multiplicity of knowl-edge graph embeddings in link prediction. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 334–354. Yuqicheng Zhu, Nico Potyka, Jiarong Pan, Bo Xiong, Yunjie He, Evgeny Kharlamov, and Steffen Staab. 2025c. Conformalized answer set prediction for knowledge graph embedding. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Ameri-cas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 731–750. Yuqicheng Zhu, Jialin Yu, Lin Li, Gengyuan Zhang, Zhen Yang, Steffen Staab, Puneet Dokania, Philip Torr, Jie Tang, and Evgeny Kharlamov. 2026. Confor-malized large language models under configuration shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.01460 .

A Dataset Details 

Benchmark sources. MML ONG BENCH -DOC uses all 1,082 examples in the orig-inal samples.json . LONG DOC URL uses all 2,325 examples in the original 

LongDocURL_public.jsonl . The main-results table uses the original full-size MML ONG BENCH -D OC page images. 

EP-given evaluation. In the diagnostic experi-ments, EP-given replaces retrieval with the anno-tated gold evidence pages and is reported on fixed MML ONG BENCH -D OC subsets specified in the corresponding tables. We do not report a L ONG -DOC URL EP-given diagnostic in the main experi-ments. 

Routing verification. All reported runs pass a check that each question is paired with its source document. 

B Evaluation Protocol 

Official benchmark scoring. All final-answer and memory-only metrics reported for our Qwen3-VL-4B runs on MML ONG BENCH -D OC and LONG DOC URL use the official judge J defined in Sec. 2. The judge follows the official evaluation pipeline for the corresponding benchmark. It first sends the model’s free-form output to GPT-4o at temperature 0. GPT-4o extracts a concise candi-date answer in the benchmark’s expected format. A benchmark-specific deterministic rule scorer then compares the extracted candidate with the gold an-swer and assigns the official generalized-accuracy score. 

Type-aware rule scoring. Both official scorers normalize the extracted candidate and gold an-swer to the benchmark’s answer types before com-parison. Integer answers require an exact match. Floating-point answers allow a 1% relative toler-ance and account for equivalent percentage scales. For string and None answers, the scorer uses exact matching for designated special strings and other-wise uses average normalized Levenshtein similar-ity (ANLS) with a 0.5 threshold. For list answers, the MML ONG BENCH -D OC scorer requires equal list lengths, sorts both lists, and uses the minimum element-level ANLS as the question score. The LONG DOC URL scorer instead matches list ele-ments greedily by ANLS and applies a square-root penalty when the list lengths differ. 

Final-answer and memory-only metrics. For final-answer accuracy, the candidate is the agent’s final answer. For memory-only accuracy, a frozen reader receives the question q and terminal work-ing memory M term , but no trajectory, page images, or tool instructions. It then produces the candi-date answer. The reader is the frozen Qwen3-14B model defined in Sec. 2. The same judge evalu-ates both candidates. Unless stated otherwise, re-ported accuracy is the mean official per-question generalized-accuracy score. The four-cell memory analysis requires binary outcomes, so it treats any positive official score as correct and a zero score as incorrect. The controlled intervention in Sec. 2 reports this binary positive-score rate so that each percentage matches its correct count and Wilson confidence interval. 

Manual audit. We manually checked 100 scored examples against human correctness judgments. The audit found six disagreements, mainly involv-ing answer aliases, list formatting, and partial-credit edge cases. The six disagreements were not concentrated on one side of the comparison. 

Training-time reward. Online GRPO uses a frozen local Qwen3-14B model to generate the memory-only answer and compute the two reward scores. This training-time scorer is separate from the official judge used for reported metrics. Only the Qwen3-VL-4B agent policy is updated; the Qwen3-14B model remains fixed. 

C Design Choices and Reward Variants 

This appendix expands on the design choices and reward analyses summarized in the main text. 

C.1 Why a conditional rate and not a marginal gap 

For a set of N examples, let n10 and n01 de-note the numbers of memory-missing-correct and answering-error examples, respectively. The marginal gap between final-answer and memory-only accuracy is (n10 − n01 )/N . Because the two failures enter with opposite signs, they can can-cel: the gap can be near zero even when many correct answers have unanswerable terminal work-ing memory. It therefore does not directly answer the question that motivates AWM: among the final answers that the agent gets right, how often is the saved memory still insufficient? The conditional rate Pmmc = n10 /N correct 

measures the fraction of binary-correct final an-swers with unanswerable terminal working mem-ory. Answering-error examples enter neither its numerator nor its denominator, so they cannot can-cel the memory failures of interest. Across datasets, subsets, and checkpoints, Pmmc retains the same interpretation: the share of correct final answers that cannot be recovered from memory alone. We therefore report it rather than the signed marginal gap. 

C.2 Why mandatory commit does not collapse memory-only accuracy onto final-answer accuracy 

Our agent loop makes a memory update mandatory after every retrieval. A natural worry is that this construction makes memory-only accuracy track final-answer accuracy because every retrieval is followed by a memory update. It does not. Each update is free-form within a schema that limits find-ings to 40 words and requires a source page. An agent can satisfy that schema with a generic page description, omit the fact needed by the question, and still answer from raw page context at the final step. The diagnostic in Sec. 2 tests this gap between writing an update and preserving what the later an-swer needs. Mandatory commit therefore isolates 

what the agent extracts at each update rather than 

when it chooses to update memory. 

C.3 Reward variants we considered 

The minimal form in Sec. 3 pairs one answer from the frozen reader with one score for that answer. We also considered three richer variants. 

Per-finding source-image grounding. A more granular signal asks a model to check, for each find-ing in M term , whether the cited source_page 

image actually supports the claim. This is a stricter per-finding evidence-grounding signal and would provide a finer-grained training signal. We did not adopt it for the main experiments because (i) it re-quires one scoring call per finding rather than one per trajectory, raising compute and scoring noise at training time, and (ii) it conditions the reward on a fixed schema, sacrificing the schema-agnosticism that we view as a feature of our minimal form. Source-grounding audits using this variant are a natural follow-up evaluation, separate from the re-ward signal used during training. 

Self-consistency over multiple reader rollouts. 

The binary memory score inherits the variance of a single reader rollout. Sampling K answers from R(q, M term ) and scoring their correct frac-tion would reduce variance but multiply scoring cost by K; we do not evaluate this variant. 

Length penalty on M term . We considered a training-time penalty for M term entries that closely mirror the predicted final-answer string. We did not adopt it because such a penalty could suppress legitimate answer-supporting findings that contain the answer value (e.g., when the answer is a value on the page); answer-echo detection remains a sep-arate audit. 

C.4 Computation overhead relative to standard GRPO Training-time overhead. Relative to standard answer-only GRPO, AWM-GRPO adds two short text-only passes through a local Qwen3-14B model for each rollout. The first pass answers from termi-nal working memory alone, and the second scores that memory-only answer for the training reward. The answer-only baseline already scores the agent’s final answer. The Qwen3-14B model remains frozen, and only the Qwen3-VL-4B agent policy is trained. We report the added model passes in-stead of a wall-clock percentage because elapsed time depends on hardware, batching, and serving configuration. 

Deployment-time overhead. The memory reader and training scorer are not called at deployment. AWM-GRPO therefore adds no deployment-time model call relative to the same agent policy and tool loop. 

C.5 Reward discrimination under AWM 

This appendix gives a structural statement of how the AWM reward (Sec. 3) differs from an answer-only reward over the four outcome cases of Ta-ble 1. The statement is purely structural and as-sumes only that the scoring and reader interfaces are fixed within each pass. During online train-ing, the frozen local Qwen3-14B model supplies the reader output and the two reward scores. For reported diagnostics, R is the frozen Qwen3-14B reader and J is the official judge from Sec. 2. Let sans , s mem ∈ { 0, 1} denote final-answer cor-rectness and memory-only answerability for a tra-jectory τ , as in Sec. 3.2, and let RAWM be the piece-wise AWM reward with values (r11 , r 10 , r 01 , r 00 )

satisfying r11 > r 10 > r 01 > r 00 . The reward mapping (sans , s mem ) 7 → RAWM strictly orders the four outcome cells: memory-supported correct receives the highest value, memory-missing cor-rect sits above answering error, and unresolved error receives the lowest value. Answer-only re-ward, by contrast, takes only two values and identi-fies (sans , s mem )=(1 , 1) with (sans , s mem )=(1 , 0) 

and identifies (0 , 1) with (0 , 0) . The AWM reward therefore distinguishes pairs of policies that agree on final-answer accuracy but differ in memory-only answerability; answer-only reward cannot. The default values (2 , 0, −0.1, −1) also preserve final-answer priority because r10 > r 01 , so a final-answer-correct trajectory with unanswerable mem-ory is never outranked by a final-answer-wrong trajectory with answerable memory. The same property has a direct GRPO conse-quence (Xie et al., 2026a,b; Zhou et al., 2026c,b). In a GRPO group of G trajectories sampled for one prompt, sampled trajectories that fall into dif-ferent reward levels can produce non-zero group-relative advantage after normalization. The key case is a group containing both memory-supported correct and memory-missing correct trajectories: answer-only reward assigns them the same value, while the AWM reward assigns values that differ by r11 − r10 . By the diagnostic of Sec. 2, this is the cell pair where the pre-training agent already shows a measurable memory-preservation gap. 

C.6 Advantage-distribution simulation details 

This appendix records the simulation behind Figure 3. For mixture m, let ρ(m) be a categorical distribution over the four cells z = ( sans , s mem ).For each reward scheme and mixture, we sample 

B = 15 ,000 groups of size G = 8 . AWM samples 

zb, 1: G ∼ Categorical( ρ(m)), while answer-only sampling uses the corresponding final-answer marginal. We assign either answer-only or AWM rewards, compute the group mean μb and standard deviation σb, and form Ab,i = ( rb,i − μb)/(σb + ϵ)

with ϵ = 10 −6. Figure 3 shows kernel-smoothed empirical advantage distributions grouped by final-answer correctness for answer-only reward and by outcome cell for AWM. Finite groups and discrete rewards produce a finite set of normalized advantage values; kernel smoothing affects only the plot, not reward or training computation. In (0 , 0) , (0 , 1) , (1 , 0) , (1 , 1) 

order, the three mixtures are 

(0 .82 , 0.05 , 0.05 , 0.08) , (0 .60 , 0.05 , 0.05 , 0.30) ,and (0 .30 , 0.05 , 0.05 , 0.60) . The off-diagonal cells 

(0 , 1) and (1 , 0) therefore retain probability 0.05 

across rows, while diagonal mass shifts from (0 , 0) 

toward (1 , 1) . The change in (1 , 0) advantage therefore comes from the rising group mean rather than a change in its cell frequency. 

D Improved-Memory Intervention Details 

This appendix expands the controlled memory com-parison in Sec. 2. The intervention is a controlled sanity check rather than a deployed method or a full-benchmark result, and the improved memories are not used as training data. The intervention uses a fixed set of 500 answerable MML ONG BENCH -DOC questions in the evidence-page-given (EP-given) setting. Here, answerable means that the benchmark annotations identify sufficient evidence for a reference answer. It does not mean that the agent’s terminal working memory preserves that evidence. 

D.1 Setup 

EP-given evaluation provides the gold evidence pages, which removes page retrieval as a source of error. The empty condition supplies no termi-nal memory. The original condition uses memory written by the base Qwen3-VL-4B agent, while the improved condition uses memory that GPT-4o constructs from the same gold evidence pages. The same 500 questions are evaluated under all three terminal-memory conditions. The final-answer gen-erator and judge are held fixed across conditions. For memory-only evaluation, the fixed reader is Qwen3-14B. All reported outputs use the official judge de-fined in Sec. 2. The original agent partitions the 500 examples into the four outcome cells from Sec. 2: 104 memory-supported correct, 77 memory-missing correct, 47 answering error, and 272 unresolved er-ror. We fix this partition from the original-memory run, then compare the same questions under origi-nal and improved memory. Memory condition Correct / N Rate (%) 95% Wilson CI (%) Empty memory 14 / 500 2.8 [1.7, 4.6] Original agent memory (4B) 181 / 500 36.2 [32.1, 40.5] Improved memory (GPT-4o) 222 / 500 44.4 [40.1, 48.8] 

Table 8: Final-answer positive-score rate in the con-trolled memory intervention. Intervals are 95% Wilson confidence intervals.                           

> Original outcome NOriginal memory correct Improved memory correct Change (count; pp) Memory-supported correct 104 104 88 −16 ;−15 .4
> Memory-missing correct 77 048 +48 ;+62 .3
> Answering error 47 47 29 −18 ;−38 .3
> Unresolved error 272 059 +59 ;+21 .7
> Total 500 151 224 +73 ;+14 .6

Table 9: Memory-only correctness after grouping ex-amples by the original agent’s outcome. Change is measured within each fixed row. 

D.2 Final-answer binary correctness 

Under the shared evaluation procedure, final-answer binary correctness is 44.4% with improved memory and 36.2% with original agent memory. With empty memory, 14 of 500 final answers re-ceive a positive official score. These rates describe the controlled 500-example comparison and are not a full-benchmark accuracy claim. 

D.3 Memory-only results by original outcome 

The original-memory column follows directly from the fixed outcome labels: memory is answerable in the memory-supported-correct and answering-error cells, and unanswerable in the other two cells. Improved memory makes 48 of the 77 memory-missing-correct examples and 59 of the 272 unresolved-error examples answerable. The same replacement makes memory unanswerable for 16 originally memory-supported-correct exam-ples and 18 answering-error examples. The net result is 73 more memory-answerable examples, an increase from 151 to 224 out of 500. The inter-vention therefore improves memory-only answer-ability overall but does not dominate the original memory in every outcome cell. 

D.4 Artifact audit 

All 500 improved memories include a

source_page citation to a page in the corresponding gold evidence_pages set. This audit verifies that every memory points to an eligible evidence page. It does not verify that every generated statement is entailed by that page or that the memory contains all evidence needed for the answer. We also apply a strict answer-string filter. The fil-ter removes every example whose improved mem-ory contains the normalized gold answer string after whitespace and punctuation normalization. It leaves 304 examples, of which the memory-only reader receives a positive official score on 98, for a positive-score rate of 98 / 304 = 32.2%. This re-maining rate shows that exact answer-string copies do not explain all successful memory-only answers. Because the filter selects a different subset rather than editing memory in place, its 32.2% rate is not a like-for-like estimate of the full-set effect. The fil-ter also cannot rule out paraphrased answer leakage or establish claim-level grounding. 

D.5 Answerability versus grounding 

Memory-only answerability asks whether the fixed reader can recover an accepted answer from the question and terminal working memory alone. Grounding asks whether the memory’s claims are supported by the cited source pages. These proper-ties are related but not equivalent. An answerable memory may contain an unsupported guess or an answer echo. A grounded memory may still omit a needed fact, or the reader may fail to use it. The audits check only source-page validity and exact answer copying; they do not establish claim-level grounding. Accordingly, the intervention shows that changing memory content can improve answer-ing under a fixed protocol; it does not show that every improved memory is fully grounded. 

D.6 Limitations 

This single-seed intervention is an upper-bound analysis on one fixed subset, reader, judge, and improved-memory model: GPT-4o is stronger than the original 4B memory writer and receives gold ev-idence pages. Table 9 shows that improved memory also hurts some outcome cells, and the improved memories are used neither for training nor in the main AWM diagnostic. Repeated runs and claim-level audits are needed. 

E Relation to Other Reliability Criteria 

AWM treats terminal working memory as an instance-level artifact. Predictive multiplicity in knowledge-graph embeddings and disagreement across repeated language-model queries expose cases where aggregate performance hides query-level variation (Zhu et al., 2024; Potyka et al., 2024); AWM instead tests whether a fixed reader can recover the answer after the pages and inter-action trace are removed. Conformal methods in-stead construct prediction sets or study coverage under predicate and configuration shift (Zhu et al., 2025c,a, 2026). We make no uncertainty or cover-age claim; the output is a per-trajectory memory-only answerability test. Other studies modify or inspect the evidence-to-reasoning path. EigentSearch-Q+ uses structured tools and SCAIR uses schema-conditioned traver-sal (Zhang et al., 2026; Chaturvedi et al., 2026). Knowledge-graph RAG studies test missing facts, while ArgRAG represents retrieved evidence as supporting or attacking arguments (Zhou et al., 2025a, 2026a; Zhu et al., 2025b). Related anal-ysis also finds asymmetric responses for logically equivalent facts under different pretraining frequen-cies (He et al., 2025). AWM leaves the agent archi-tecture and memory schema unchanged and evalu-ates the source-linked memory they produce: the memory passes only when the reader can answer without the pages or the trajectory.