Title: ST-ColoNet: Spatio-Temporal Colon Segment Recognition via Hybrid Attention and Edge-Guided Feature Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.28119v2

Published Time: Tue, 02 Jun 2026 01:59:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

# ST-ColoNet: Spatio-Temporal Colon Segment Recognition via Hybrid Attention and Edge-Guided Feature Learning 

## Crystal Cai 1†, Ziyi Wang 1†, Zhengjie Zhang 2†, Jingsheng Gao 1, Dahong Qian 1 and Suncheng Xiang 1* 1Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China. 

2The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Guangzhou, 511453, China. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): xiangsuncheng17@sjtu.edu.cn; Contributing authors: crystal.cai@sjtu.edu.cn; chloewangzy@163.com; zzhang666@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn; gaojingsheng@sjtu.edu.cn; dahong.qian@sjtu.edu.cn; 

†These authors contributed equally to this work. 

Abstract 

Colo-segment recognition in colonoscopy videos is a key requirement for many downstream tasks, but existing automatic recognition meth-ods only use colonoscopy images without fully exploiting the use of temporal information, leading to poor performance. Additionally, rele-vant public video-based datasets are in scarcity. To tackle this problem, we curate and release a labeled dataset specifically for the task of colo-segment recognition. In addition, we propose a two-stage deep learning-based framework, Colo-Segment Recognition via SpatioTem-poral Network (ST-ColoNet), for the task of colo-segment recognition from colonoscopy videos which includes the Colorlaus module that uses metric learning to optimize edge-mediated spatial feature extraction, as well as the Full-Temp module which combines three self-attention patterns to better approximate full self-attention on long colonoscopy sequences and optimize temporal feature aggregation. Through exten-sive ablation experiments, we show that our framework is capable of achieving state-of-the-art performance on the task of colo-segment recog-nition, achieving an accuracy of 81.0% and F1-score of 70.7%, which is a 

1

> arXiv:2605.28119v2 [cs.CV] 1 Jun 2026

Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 2 Wang et al.  

> tremendous improvement over state-of-the-art methods. The dataset and code will be released at https://github.com/JeremyXSC/ST-ColoNet.
> Keywords: Self-attention, Colonoscopy, Colo-segment recognition, Metric learning, Temporal features

# 1 Introduction 

Colonoscopies are a critical procedure in the maintenance of digestive health (Lee et al, 2014). For anatomical localization, endoscopists typically divide the lower digestive tract into six segments: the ileocecal region, the ascending colon, the transverse colon, the descending colon, and the rectcanal region. As illustrated in Figure 1, colonoscopy procedures progress sequentially through these segments during withdrawal. Segmenting colon regions is of paramount importance so that various tasks requiring this detailed distinguishment between segments of the colon can be performed, such as assessing colon preparation (Zhou et al, 2020, 2021) and polyp re-identification (Xiang et al, 2023, 2024b). Owing to the highly simi-lar visual appearance of different colon segments, it is tedious for endoscopists to constantly relocalize themselves during the procedure, which requires sub-stantial effort and time (Xiang et al, 2024a). As such, there is a strong clinical demand for reliable automatic colo-segment recognition methods. During manual localization, an anatomical detail which is typically used by endoscopists is the thickness of the haustral folds on the colon walls. Upon entry into the colon through the anus, the haustral folds in the descending colon are more rounded in appearance (Bortz, 2016; Yee, 2008). With pro-gression into the transverse colon, the haustral folds become slightly thicker and are also more triangular in appearance. In the ascending colon, the haus-tral folds are noticeably trianlocalisation during colonoscopiesthickest amongst the entire length of the colon. These anatomical differences have been com-monly exploited by endoscopists for manual localization during colonoscopy procedures. Recently, efforts have also been made to study the application of haustral folds in deep learning, for areas such as 3D reconstruction (Chen et al, 2019; Ozyoruk et al, 2021) . Several studies have endeavored to employ deep learning techniques for colo-segment recognition. Jheng et al (2022) utilized the VGG16 (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014) model to train a polyp detection model capable of identi-fying the cecum. Similarly, Saito et al (2021) developed a 7-class classification framework using GoogLeNet (Szegedy et al, 2015) to distinguish between the six aforementioned segments and others. These efforts relied on meticulously curated proprietary image datasets, with manual selection of high-quality images that do not fully represent typical colonoscopy videos. In essence, there are significant differences in the lengths of colon seg-ments, with the ileocecal region and the anus being notably shorter and leading Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Wang et al. 3 

> Fig. 1 Illustration of flexures and colo-segments of the lower digestive tract. Colonoscopy procedures begin with the entrance of the colonoscope through the anus, and progresses to the ileocecal region before withdrawal. Sample images from each flexure and colo-segment show great resemblance between the entire length of the colon, with haustral fold differences slightly aiding in differentiation.

to extreme class-imbalance. Furthermore, colonoscopy videos vary greatly between different patients, but show minimal variation between segments, especially adjacent colonic regions, within the same patient. Consequently, the task of colo-segment recognition poses substantial challenges. Without lever-aging temporal information, the performance of these models is sub-optimal in a video setting as the use of temporal information is crucial in video scene segmentation (Zhang et al, 2026). When analyzing the task of colo-segment recognition at the macroscopic level, videos can essentially be viewed as long image sequences over time. As such, this task can be compared to surgical phase recognition in that they both target long video sequences of colonoscopies or endoscopies. Methods in surgical phase recognition commonly use the MS-TCN (Multi-Stage Tempo-ral Convolutional Network) (Farha and Gall, 2019), which effectively models long-term dependencies in sequences and can be parallelized for high com-putational efficiency, making it widely-used in action segmentation. Methods such as ASFormer (Yi et al, 2021) and LTContext (Bahrami et al, 2023) based on the temporal Transformer architecture exploit the advantages of attention mechanisms in handling long sequence data, gradually achieving better results in video action segmentation, but remain less explored in the fields of surgical phase recognition or colo-segment recognition. However, the task of colo-segment recognition is inherently different from surgical phase recognition when examined at the icroscopic, frame-level per-spective. In surgical phase recognition (Jin et al, 2017, 2020; Czempiel et al, Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 4 Wang et al. 

2020; Gao et al, 2021), different surgical tools are used for each phase which provide an object-of-focus for the recognition model. Additionally, these tools perform distinct motion patterns across surgical phases, which further facil-itates the recognition of different phases. On the contrary, there are no noticeable objects to act as the object-of-focus for the task of colo-segment recognition, and no noticeably different actions to focus on either, as the only action visible is the first-person view of movement through the colon, which is relatively constant throughout. In addition, the differences between differ-ent colo-segments are minute for even endoscopists. Altogether, these factors substantially increase the inherent difficulty of the colo-segment recognition task. To combat this challenging task, we propose to target the task at two levels: the macroscopic and microscopic levels. At the macroscopic level, we propose to tackle the problem of analyzing long colonoscopy video sequences using a self-attention-based temporal module. As complete self-attention is inefficient to apply to long sequences, we propose three structured attention patterns which retain the accuracy of self-attention while still being efficient, computaticroscopic level, we propose to tackle the fine-grained image-level recognition problem by exploiting Haustral fold edge-based differences existent between different colo-segments through the use of an edge-detection branch during spatial feature extraction. To address the current scarcity of publicly available datasets, we have curated and annotated a comprehensive withdrawal video dataset, termed ColoSeg, specifically for the colo-segment recognition task. Furthermore, in response to the challenges inherent in colonic segmentation tasks, we pro-pose Colo-Segment Recognition via SpatioTemporal Network, or ST-ColoNet, which fully leverages spatiotemporal information. The main contributions are as follows: 

• We introduce an annotated, comprehensive colonoscopy withdrawal video dataset named ColoSeg, specifically for the task of colo-segment recognition. 

• To targtarget the task at the macroscopic level, we introduce the Full-Temp module which uses three self-attention patterns to better capture the temporal relations existent between frames of the colonoscopy video. 

• At the microscthe microscopic level, we propose the ColoHaus module, which utilizes a ResNet50-based branch for general spatial feature extraction, as well as an edge-detection branch which captures supplementary Haustral fold-based edge information, to better target the fine-grained image recogni-tion problem existent between different colo-segements. Further use of triplet loss (Balntas et al, 2016) during this process facilitates the reduction of intra-class variance, thereby mitigating the significant differences observed in colonoscopy videos across different patients. 

• These methodologies collectively act to alleviate the challenges associated with colo-segment recognition tasks and enhance ST-ColoNet’s performance comparable to state-of-the-art methods. Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Wang et al. 5

# 2 Related Work 

## 2.1 Colo-segment recognition 

Although colo-segment recognition for colonoscopies is a relatively newer field, a few studies employ deep learning for this task (Saito et al, 2021; Harzig et al, 2019; Jheng et al, 2022; Houwen et al, 2023). These methods are mainly image-based approaches, employing off-the-shelf image classification models such as VGG16 (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014) and GoogLeNet (Szegedy et al, 2015) to classify colonoscopy frame images given in random order as one of the aforementioned segment classes. However, these methods utilize private colonoscopy datasets, with meticulous and manual preprocessing steps for frame extraction from complete colonoscopy videos, performed by expert endoscopists. As a result, a substantial amount of expert time is still required, which could otherwise be employed more practically elsewhere, and defeats the purpose of the automation of the colo-segment recognition process, while still leading to mediocre results. Density-based clustering has been explored as a potential means to form clusters of extracted spatial features. This line of reasoning assumes that the spatial features of the flexures of the colon, which are clinically recognized as anatomically distinct regions during colonoscopy insertion (Lee et al, 2014), should be different from the spatial features of non-flexure regions of the colon. As such, flexure spatial features are expected to form noticeable clusters along the time axis of the colonoscopy video in theory. However, this method does not effectively automate the use of the temporal component of the colonoscopy videos as temporal information must be manually provided during the cluster-ing process. Additionally, through preliminary experiments of this method on our own dataset, it was found that flexure spatial features do not in fact form noticeable clusters which can further aid in colo-segment recognition. This may be due to the fact that our own dataset includes sample videos and frames which show poor colon preparation, reflecting realistic cases, therefore making the flexure features less prominent and less distinguishable from other sections of the colon.As such, this method is not included in further comparisons with state-of-the-art methods. 

## 2.2 Surgical phase recognition 

On the other hand, a similar task which utilizes temporal information in a more effective way is surgical phase recognition (Jin et al, 2017, 2020; Czempiel et al, 2020; Gao et al, 2021; Tao et al, 2023; Yue et al, 2023; Ding et al, 2023). These methods commonly use the Multi-Stage Temporal Convolutional Network (MS-TCN) (Farha and Gall, 2019), which stacks multiple blocks of the original Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN) (Lea et al, 2016, 2017) to continuously refine temporal predictions. The TCN is effective in endoscopy surgical phase recognition as it allows the analysis of long sequences efficiently, while also utilizing dilated temporal convolutions which are able to effectively Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 6 Wang et al. 

model the temporal relations of items in sequence. However, this method of modeling the temporal relations existent in colonoscopy videos has yet to be widely applied to the task of colo-segment recognition. Additionally, the task of colo-segment recognition differs from surgical phase and tool recognition as there lacks a specific object to focus on in indi-vidual frames, in addition to the high similarity between each colo-segment making colo-segment recognition a fine-grained image task. As such, includ-ing only temporal information is insufficient to target the task of colo-segment recognition. 

## 2.3 Attention for action segmentation 

In light of the effectiveness in applying attention to fields such as image classification in Transformers (Dosovitskiy, 2020), efforts have been made to attempt to achieve the same effectiveness for temporal sequence analysis for the field of action segmentation. One such method is the ASFormer (Yi et al, 2021), which utilizes self-attention to generate initial temporal-based predictions, before utilizing cross-attention in subsequent stages for continual prediction refinement. Another popularly-used method is the LTContext (Bahrami et al, 2023) , which is similarly based on the MS-TCN. Building on ASFormer, the authors of LTContext reasoned that only utilizing one type of self-attention pattern only captures local information, but does not sufficiently capture the global relationships between items in the complete, long temporal sequence. As such, the authors included the original windowed self-attention, which breaks the entire temporal sequence into small windows and calculates self-attention for each window, allowing increased efficiency in handling the long sequence. Additionally, they introduced a sparse attention pattern to capture global relations, which also breaks the entire sequence into windows, but calculates self-attention iteratively using the first item of each window, the second, and so forth. The authors reasoned that this would provide the necessary global information that is lost by breaking the sequence into windows, while still enabling efficient processing. However, this method still does not comprehensively incorporate global temporal relationships between all items within the longer sequence. Sparse attention used limits item interaction between windows to a set indexed item each time, instead of allowing for random and more comprehensive interac-tions between items of different windows. As such, we propose to include the addition of a random attention pattern (Zaheer et al, 2020), which would allow iterations of random items within each window with each other, which would allow more interactions within the longer sequence, and allow us to model full self-attention for the entire temporal sequence in a more comprehensive way. Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Wang et al. 7             

> Table 1 OVERVIEW OF EXISTING ENDOSCOPY DATASETS
> Dataset Type of Data Number of Categories Size of Dataset Endomapper Videos 10 5HyperKvasir Images 21400 ColoSeg (Ours) Videos 521

# 3 Dataset 

Currently, there are two publicly available datasets related to colon seg-mentation: Endomapper (Azagra et al, 2023) and HyperKvasir (Borgli et al, 2020). The Endomapper dataset consists of a total of 96 endoscopic examina-tion videos, with anatomical segment information annotated in 5 cases. In the included anatomical annotations, it additionally annotates the sigmoid colon, hepatic flexure, and splenic flexure, while also splitting the ileocecum into the ileum and cecum. According to common practice (Jheng et al, 2022; Saito et al, 2021), the hepatic flexure is included as part of the ascending colon while the splenic flexure is included as part of the descending colon. However, the overall quantity of the EndoMapper labeled colo-segment dataset is relatively low, and one video does not reach the ileocecum, making it incomplete as a withdrawal video. HyperKvasir is a large-scale dataset containing images and videos of the gastrointestinal tract, but its lower gastrointestinal tract annota-tions only include images of the ileum and cecum, with limited quantity and categories. A detailed comparison is shown in Table 1. To facilitate further research in the field of colo-segment recognition, we have collected the ColoSeg dataset which is comprised of the EndoMapper dataset and a newly-collected dataset, specifically for the task of colo-segment recognition, as illustrated in Figure 2. We curated and annotated the colonic segments in 21 complete withdrawal videos, forming the ColoSeg dataset. These videos were collected from patients undergoing routine colonoscopy examinations at Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University. The research was approved by the hospital’s Medical Ethics Committee, and informed consent was obtained from each patient prior to examination. We used the Olympus CV-290 colonoscope with its built-in light source and image processor. The videos were recorded at a resolution of 1920x1080 pixels and a frame rate of 25 frames per second. In total, the dataset comprises of 5.84 hours of colonoscopy examination videos, each annotated with anatomical landmark labels. Addi-tionally, in order to preserve patient anonymity, all identifying information from the videos have been removed. The originally-released Endomapper dataset included colo-segment labels for only 5 out of all 93 videos. To further improve the size of the ColoSeg dataset, we additionally provide colo-segment labels for the remain-ing Endomapper videos, and curate them as part of the ColoSeg dataset. Of the remaining 88 videos: 3 are excluded due to not including the withdrawal portion, 1 is excluded due to having an incomplete withdrawal phase, 7 are Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 8 Wang et al. Ileocecum  Ascending colon  Transverse colon  Descending colon  Anus   

> Fig. 2 Overlook of the introduced dataset, ColoSeg, and sample images of different colon segments extracted from colonoscopy withdrawal videos of two patients.
> Table 2 STATISTICS OF VIDEOS IN COLOSEG

Source Min (s) Max (s) Average (s) Standard deviation Zhongshan 73 493 171.86 105.63 Endomapper 102 1620 673.14 402.34 Total 73 1620 516.02 410.66 

excluded due to poor visibility making them difficult to annotate for experts, and finally, 22 are excluded due to being gastroscopies and showing mainly the upper digestive system. The collected videos were annotated by four professional endoscopists to demarcate the boundaries of colonic segments, dividing the videos into 5 segments: ileocecum, ascending colon, transverse colon, descending colon (including sigmoid colon), and anus. Due to the difficulty in precisely delineat-ing the boundary between the sigmoid and descending colon, the sigmoid colon is included as part of the descending colon in ColoSeg. The labels provided by the endoscopists are timestamp-based, specifying between which time frames each colo-segment appears in each video. These timestamps were then further processed so that labels were also provided frame-wise for each video. The number of frames that can be extracted after preprocessing by retaining one frame per second are as follows: 2891 for the ileocecum, 3466 for the ascend-ing colon, 3291 for the transverse colon, 5741 for the descending colon, and 2091 for the anus. Our introduced ColoSeg dataset addresses the shortage in labeled colo-segment recognition datasets, providing 81 complete withdrawal videos with complete segment annotations. More detailed information about our ColoSeg dataset is depicted in Table 2 and Table 3. 

# 4 Methodology 

## 4.1 Problem definition 

The task of colo-segment recognition involves recognizing the colo-segments ileocecum, ascending colon, transverse colon, descending colon, and the anus from a complete colonoscopy withdrawal video. The overall problem can be formulated as follows: a withdrawal video is essentially a stack of images, where each image is a frame extracted from the complete video. For a video of time Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Wang et al. 9 

> Table 3 STATISTICS OF FRAMES EXTRACTED FROM VIDEOS IN COLOSEG

Segment Min Max Average Standard deviation Ileocecum 75 24160 1902.91 3543.29 Ascending colon 100 36500 6029.25 7727.51 Transverse colon 50 17900 3294.03 4116.02 Descending colon 225 36800 8137.76 8163.50 Anus 50 11700 487.09 1445.76 Total 1950 64800 19851.04 17032.02 LCE     

> Spatial extractor
> Att
> Effect of metric learning Windowed attention Sparse attention
> Att
> ……
> f1
> ft
> fT
> Tempora lextractor
> Dilated
> Conv1 d
> Windowed
> attention
> Spars e
> attention
> Fig. 3 Our ST-ColoNet framework. Frames are extracted from colonoscopy videos and subsequently acts as input to a two-branched spatial feature extractor employing triplet loss, which is able to extract edge-mediated features. The resultant edge-mediated spatial features undergo processing by a temporal feature extractor enhanced with windowed attention, global attention, and random attention mechanisms.

length T in seconds, the total number of frames which can be extracted from the complete video is t = T × f ps , and the task of colo-segment recognition is to assign a colo-segment label to each frame, so that the overall video can be partitioned into 5 different sections pertaining to each of the 5 colo-segments. This task can be targeted microscopically and macroscopically. At the microscopic level, the model must utilize spatial features present within each frame to make a frame-wise prediction on the colo-segment. However, due to the fact that different colo-segments show highly similar spatial features which are difficult for even endoscopists to discern at a frame-level, the problem then presents as a fine-grained image classification problem at the microscopic level. At the macroscopic level, the temporal relations between frames which form a long sequence to constitute the complete video can be utilized to further improve prediction accuracy. During the withdrawal phase, the inher-ent knowledge which exists is that the ileocecum, ascending colon, transverse colon,descending colon, and the anus must appear consecutively in sequence. Using temporal feature analysis, this inherent sequential knowledge can be learned, to supplement spatial features in making colo-segment predictions. Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 10 Wang et al. 

As such, we aim to target the colo-segment recognition problem at the microscopic level by introducing the ColoHaus spatial feature extraction module, and at the macroscopic level using the Full-Temp temporal feature extraction module. The proposed ST-ColoNet framework is illustrated in Figure 3 and com-prises of two components: spatial feature extraction and temporal feature extraction. Video frames x are transformed into spatial features f after pass-ing through the spatial feature extractor. These features are then aggregated with contextual information in the temporal feature extractor to become spa-tiotemporal features g, ultimately resulting in the output of predicted labels 

y.

## 4.2 Spatial feature extraction 

To target the task microscopically, the first step of the colo-segment recog-nition framework is the spatial feature extraction module, ColoHaus, aimed at extracting general spatial features from colonoscopy video frames. We employ ResNet18 (He et al, 2016) as the first spatial feature extraction branch, in order to extract general spatial features fsg for each frame i = 1 , ..., t 

for all t frames in the colonoscopy video. In order to exploit the Haustral fold thickness differences present between different colo-segments, we employ an edge detection model specifically targeting Haustral folds within colonoscopy images (Jin et al, 2023) as the second branch, in order to extract edge-based spatial features present within each frame, to target the fine-grained image classification problem. To provide a pseudo-ground-truth for edges present in the colonoscopy frames, the DexiNed edge detection model (Poma et al, 2020) was first utilized to generate pseudo-ground-truth edge maps Gt for each colonoscopy frame i = 1 , ..., t , where t is the total number of frames extracted from the colonoscopy video. The edge detection branch is then used to extract edge-based spatial features fse for each frame i = 1 , ..., t for all t frames. The MSE loss is used to calculate the mean squared error between the predicted edge map and the pseudo-ground-truth: 

LMSE = 1

P

> T

X

> t=1
> I

X

> i=1
> J

X

> j=1

(Et(i, j ) − Gt(i, j )) 2 (1) where I corresponds to the vertical image resolution, J corresponds to the horizontal image resolution, and P is the total number of pixels. The Et cor-responds to the predicted edge map for the frame t, while the Gt corresponds to the pseudo-ground-truth edge map. Following extraction of both general and edge-based spatial features by the two separate branches, the features fsg and fse are then fused through concatenation to obtain edge-mediated spatial features fs.This process is supplemented with triplet margin loss training (Balntas et al, 2016). The core idea of triplet margin loss is to target the large intra-class and small inter-class variance which is existent in colo-segments. Specifically, it Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Wang et al. 11 treats each image sample as an anchor image, with another image sample taken from the same class acting as the positive sample, and an image taken from a different class acting as the negative sample. In order to more effectively reduce the large intra-class variance, a hard positive sample is selected by taking the furthest frame from the same class or colo-segment. Likewise, an easy negative sample is selected by taking the nearest frame from a different class or colo-segment, in order to more effectively improve the small inter-class variance. During training, triplet loss acts to pull the anchor and positive sample features closer to each other while pushing the anchor and negative sample features further from each other, thereby enhancing feature separability. This design makes feature representations more compact and robust, significantly aiding in addressing the challenge of large intra-class and small inter-class variances. 

LTriplet = max (0 , D (a, p ) − D(a, n ) + m) (2) The triplet loss LTriplet used is illustrated as in Equation (2), where a is the anchor image frame or sample, p is the hard positive sample taken from the same class or colo-segment, and n is the easy negative sample taken from the nearest different class or colo-segment. The distance between the anchor and positive sample or the anchor and negative sample is measured by Euclidean distance, designated by D, with m acting as the margin between the positive and negative pairs to enhance feature separability. 

LT = −

> t

X

> i=1

yi log( pi) + λ (max (0 , D (a, p ) − D(a, n ) + m)) (3) As such, the total loss employed for training spatial feature extraction using metric learning is shown in Equation (3), which is composed of a cross-entropy loss for per frame segment classification accuracy, as well as the triplet loss. The 

t represents the total number of frames from which features were extracted, 

yi is the ground truth label which is compared to the prediction pi for the ith 

frame. In practical use during training, the centers cjt are updated in small batches, by calculating the average for the features of each corresponding ith 

frame belonging to the jth class. At the same time, in order to avoid large fluctuations due to incorrectly classified samples, a weight λ is used to control the impact of the triplet loss on the entire loss calculation. 

## 4.3 Full-LTC for spatiotemporal feature extraction 

The original LTContext model uses MS-TCN as a backbone on which, in addition to dilated convolution layers, attention is also added to better capture global information. Specifically, the model is composed of multiple stages of LTContext blocks which are composed of a residual structure including a con-volutional layer, a windowed attention block, and a global attention block. In particular, the convolutional layer is a 1D dilated temporal convolution with a kernel size of 3. The two types of attention are sparse self-attention patterns, that aim to approximate full self-attention which is otherwise computationally Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 12 Wang et al. 

expensive to apply to long sequences such as colonoscopy withdrawal videos. However, these two attention patterns are still lacking in more comprehen-sive utilization of full sequence information. As such, we propose the addition of the random attention pattern first introduced as part of Big Bird (Zaheer et al, 2020), but yet to be utilized for temporal sequence analysis. Specifically, a random attention block is added following the global attention block within the LTContext block to form the Full-LTC block, which allows a more com-prehensive and dynamic approach to approximating full self-attention due to the random nature of this attention pattern. The proposed spatiotemporal feature extraction module, Full-LTC, uti-lizes Full-LTC blocks composed of three types of attention, namely windowed, global and random, which are all based on the concept of self-attention defined as: Attn( q, s 1: n) = softmax 

 Wq q(Wks1: n)⊤

√dk



Wv s1: n (4) With Q, K, V ∈ RT ×D originating from features f extracted at the previous stage by the spatial feature extractor, where t represents the number of frames and D denotes the feature dimension. For long sequences, T is significantly large which results in high computational expense, making it challenging to compute attention for the entire sequence. By modifying Q, K and V , three corresponding types of attention layers are formed. Windowed attention refers to attention computed from windows, where the entire sequence is divided into windows of equal length and only adjacent windows are considered, saving computational resources. To enable extraction of global contextual informa-tion, a global attention layer follows which also partitions the sequence into windows but considers only one element from each window when computing attention. However, the global context in which these two types of attention can contribute is still limited. Thus, an additional random attention layer is intro-duced. This random attention layer uses random attention masks to control which elements between each window are allowed to interact with a sparsity index r. As the random attention mask generated each time is different, this allows the random attention layer to approximate full self-attention in multi-ple different ways, hence its dynamic nature in comparison to windowed and global attention patterns which are fixed, These three attention patterns are visualized in Figure 4. Through stacking these three types of attention layers in the Full-Temp block, the amount of global context that can be captured is further ameliorated, and the temporal feature extraction module Full-Temp is able to better approximate full self-attention on long temporal sequences. The spatiotemporal features are fed through a final fully-connected layer to output colo-segment predictions, with cross-entropy being used for optimiza-tion. 

LCE = −

> T

X

> t=1

yt log( pt) (5) Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Wang et al. 13 Windowed 

Attention 

Global 

Attention 

Random 

Attention 

LTContext 

Attention Pattern 

Full -Temp 

Attention Pattern  

> Fig. 4 Illustration of attention mechanisms. Local and global attention mechanisms have previously been used by LTContext for action segmentation, but still leave gaps during full sequence analysis. Our Full-Temp module uses local, global, and random attention to better approximate full self-attention on the long colonoscopy video for more comprehensive sequence analysis.

# 5 Experiments & Results 

## 5.1 Preprocessing 

The pre-processing of input colonoscopy videos requires first extracting one frame from each second of withdrawal video using traditional Sobel and Vari-ance of Laplacian (Sobel et al, 1968; Basu, 2002) image filtering methods. This method ensures not only that the frames extracted contain enough meaningful features for detecting anatomical segments, but also that at least one frame from each second of video is retained to preserve temporal continuity for more effective temporal feature extraction. 

## 5.2 Evaluation metrics 

To perform a comprehensive evaluation of model performance, we employ accuracy (ACC), precision (PR), recall (RE) and the Jaccard Index (JI) to evaluate the performance of our model on the ColoSeg dataset. In particular, as PR and RE also include values for each individual class, we report averaged PR and RE over all classes for evaluation. Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 14 Wang et al.   

> Table 4 COMPARISONS WITH STATE-OF-THE-ART COLONOSCOPY ANATOMICAL SEGMENT DETECTION MODELS, WITH MEAN VALUES FROM 5-FOLD CROSS-VALIDATION EXPERIMENTS. OUR METHOD, IN BOLD , SHOWS STATE-OF-THE-ART RESULTS IN COMPARISON TO PREVIOUSLY-USED METHODS. SECOND-BEST RESULTS ARE SHOWN WITH UNDERLINE.

Method Accuracy Precision Recall Jaccard F1 Saito et al. (Saito et al, 2021) 59.0 41.5 36.4 26.1 38.8 GUTAID (Jheng et al, 2022) 48.0 23.8 39.7 17.5 28.8 SV-RCNet (Jin et al, 2017) 50.1 31.4 32.1 20.4 31.7 MTRCNet (Jin et al, 2020) 52.8 39.0 39.9 25.4 39.4 TecNO (Czempiel et al, 2020) 66.0 51.1 44.6 30.7 48.8 Trans-SVNet (Gao et al, 2021) 71.6 53.9 42.2 31.9 47.4 

ST-ColoNet (Ours) 81.0 72.5 69.4 55.9 70.7 

## 5.3 Implementation details 

All module components of the ST-ColoNet framework are implemented in Python using the Pytorch library with training of the framework using an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti GPU. The dataset was split according to 5-fold cross-validation for experiments. The spatial feature extractor utilizes a pre-trained ResNet18 model with parameters initialized using weights from ImageNet (He et al, 2016) and trained with a batch size of 100. The entire framework uses the Adam optimizer, with the learning rate for the spatial feature extractor set to 5 × 10 −4 and the learning rate for the temporal fea-ture extractor set to 1 × 10 −3. Image augmentation was applied to the frames extracted from the colonoscopy videos and include color jittering, image crop-ping to 224 × 224, and random mirroring for the frames. For the triplet loss, 

λ was empirically set to 0.001 while the margin, m, was set to 2.0. The win-dow length for both attention types is set to 64. The sparsity index, r, for the random attention is set to 0.1. These parameters are set according to their original implementations. The proposed ST-ColoNet is an offline framework, with comparisons to the comparable task of surgical workflow recognition similarly using temporal features, Trans-SVNet (Gao et al, 2021) and TeCNO (Czempiel et al, 2020) also using the respective offline implementations. Due to lack of publicized code for previous CSR methods (Jheng et al, 2022; Saito et al, 2021), comparisons made to state-of-the-art CSR methods used re-implemented versions of the proposed models. 

## 5.4 Comparisons to other state-of-the-art methods 

As illustrated in Table 4, we performed comparisons of our method with other state-of-the-art methods previously used for the task of colonoscopy anatomical segment detection. As other methods utilizing the video modal-ity for the task of colo-segment recognition are currently limited, we perform Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Wang et al. 15 Ileocecum   

> Ascending colon
> Transverse colon
> Descending colon
> Anus
> Saito et al.
> Ours
> Ground truth
> TeCNO
> Trans -SVNet
> Fig. 5 Color-coded ribbon visualizing anatomical segment detection performance of SOTA models on a colonoscopy withdrawal video.
> Table 5 SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL ABLATION EXPERIMENTS ON COMPONENTS OF THE OVERALL ST-ColoNet.

Baseline Triplet loss LTC Full-LTC Accuracy Precision Recall Jaccard F1 

✓ × × × 51.07 32.42 34.26 20.68 30.93 

✓ ✓ × × 53.07 37.63 34.07 22.78 35.68 

✓ ✓ ✓ × 78.73 72.94 68.13 54.18 70.16 

✓ ✓ × ✓ 80.95 72.47 69.41 55.93 70.69 

comparisons with methods utilizing primarily colonoscopy images as well as other video-based methods in a similar task of surgical phase recognition such as TeCNO and Trans-SVNet (Czempiel et al, 2020; Gao et al, 2021). It is important to note that the previous methods in CSR did not utilize temporal features for the colo-segment detection. It is noticeable from these results that in comparison to the second-best CSR method (Saito et al, 2021), our pro-posed framework achieves a significant improvement of approximately 7.8% in accuracy. Additionally, the precision, recall, Jaccard index and F1 score of our method increases by 28.3%, 28.7%, 26.1% and 28.3%, respectively. Although these other methods utilize models which have commonly been used in the past for classification-based tasks, such as GoogLeNet (Saito et al, 2021) and VGG16 (Jheng et al, 2022), their performance is noticeably lower in comparison to our proposed ST-ColoNet which includes the addition of tem-poral features for segment detection. From these results, it can be observed that our method outperforms other state-of-the-arts methods for the task of colonoscopy anatomical segment detection on the ColoSeg dataset. When com-paring to SOTA methods in the similar task of surgical workflow recognition which similarly uses temporal features, our method also shows a 4.8% increase in comparison to the best method of Trans-SVNet (Gao et al, 2021) which uses a non-attention-based multi-stage TCN for temporal feature extraction. This shows that the utilization of attention mechanisms for temporal feature extrac-tion is effective in obtaining more representative local and global contexts from the overall colonoscopy video sequence. From the qualitative assessment of the performance of various methods as shown in Figure 5, it can be observed that ST-ColoNet is able to detect Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 16 Wang et al. 

anatomical segments most in-line with the ground truth labels. Although meth-ods without the use of temporal information show similar accuracies, such as with GoogLeNet as used in (Saito et al, 2021), when using them for seg-ment detection in colonoscopy withdrawal videos these types of models have high tendency to detect a majority of frames within the video as the descend-ing colon, which suggests overfitting. In comparison, our proposed method shows detection of different colon segments within the withdrawal video, with boundaries between different colon segments also near that of the ground truth. Overall, we show that in comparison to previously used purely image-based methods in anatomical segment detection and current surgical phase recognition methods, our method is able to achieve state-of-the-art results. 

## 5.5 Ablation experiments 

As shown in Table 5, we performed ablation experiments for both stages of ST-ColoNet. Using metric learning with center loss showed an increase in performance of 1.1% while the use of temporal information via LTCon-text showed an increase of 19.7%. Ablations for both stages of the framework showed performance increases, indicating that our proposed method is effec-tive for the task of colo-segment recognition. In comparison to center loss, the use of temporal features showed a markedly greater performance increase, which demonstrates that temporal information is of vital importance for the recognition of colo-segments. Center loss is able to improve the accuracy of classification based purely on spatial information, but at the same time is able to aid in the optimization of the temporal extractor. Additionally, RE and Jaccard also increased by 16.4% and 17.1% when using temporal information, especially for more under-represented classes. 

## 5.6 Discussion 

The task of colo-segment recognition task is relatively newer in the field of colonoscopy video analysis, and aims at the recognition of colo-segments such as the ileocecum, ascending colon, transverse colon, descending colon, and the anus from complete colonoscopy withdrawal videos. Most existing methods in colo-segment recognition utilize only spatial information, employing classic image classification models to predict the colo-segment present within each image (Jheng et al, 2022; Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014; Saito et al, 2021; Szegedy et al, 2015; Houwen et al, 2023; Harzig et al, 2019; He et al, 2016). However, most of these methods make predictions to individual frames out-of-order, and do not utilize the complete colonoscopy videos themselves. In this way, the additional temporal aspect natural to the colonoscopy video modality is lost, and all details of the data cannot be exploited to the fullest capacity for the task of colo-segment recognition. We propose the ST-ColoNet, which tackles the task of colo-segment recog-nition from both a microscopic and macroscopic level, in order to exploit both spatial and temporal features for the problem. Specifically, from the Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Wang et al. 17 microscopic level, we tackle the fine-grained image classification problem and present the ColorHaus module by exploiting Haustral fold thickness differ-ences present between different colo-segment with the addition of a second edge-based spatial feature extraction branch, in addition to a general spatial feature extraction branch, in order to combine both through concatenation to obtain edge-mediated spatial features. The process of spatial feature extrac-tion is mediated by metric learning via triplet loss, to further combat the fine-grained image classification problem. Moreover, we present the Full-Temp module which utilizes 3 types of self-attention patterns to better approximate full self-attention on long colonoscopy video sequences, in order to extract tem-poral relations between frames of the video and exploit the temporal aspect of the withdrawal videos. In comparison with SOTA methods in both colo-segment recognition and surgical phase recognition on our presented dataset ColoSeg, we show that ST-ColoNet is able to achieve superior performance. This shows that the edge-mediated spatial features are better able to target the fine-grained image classification problem present for colo-segment recognition, and that the temporal features extracted through the use of 3 self-attention patterns are able to model more comprehensive local and global temporal rela-tions. Additionally, the inclusion of temporal features allows the model to learn the inherent knowledge that colo-segments must appear consecutively in a set sequence during withdrawal, which affords better performance in comparison to methods which do not exploit the temporal aspect of colonoscopy videos and thus do not learn this inherent temporal sequence. It is worth noting that the attention patterns utilized in Full-Temp, while better approximating full self-attention on the long sequences, also results in slight overlap between the items which are included during calculation for each attention pattern. This could lead to excess computational expense, which could be solved by using approximation patterns which were more comple-mentary to each other. Furthermore, in analyzing the extracted colonoscopy frames, it is noticeable that camera fragments resulting from bubbles and flu-ids, amongst other debris, sometimes result in the reflection of dark horizontal and vertical lines. Poor preparation of the colon for colonoscopy may also result in debris such as fecal matter or bubbles. These factors may collectively lead to the false detection of edge information by the spatial extractor. In an ideal setting as represented by most datasets, images or videos with these types of debris would be removed from the dataset. However, in a realistic setting, adequate preparation may be difficult to achieve due to patient factors ( ?). As such, some of these cases are retained in the ColoSeg dataset to allow it to reflect a more realistic colonoscopic scenery. Nonetheless, it is important for this to be addressed in order to maintain model performance. Current colonoscopy preprocessing procedures mainly involve the extraction of frames from videos for more efficient processing of long videos. However, of the meth-ods which aim at preprocessing to target the quality of colonoscopy images or videos, most are based on traditional image analysis methods with only a select few which use deep learning methods to remove fragments or lessen Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 18 Wang et al. 

the impact of fragments such as bubbles. Colonoscopy image or video quality preprocessing methods are as such in dire need, as they would not only be applicable in colo-segment recognition, but also surgical phase and tool recog-nition, allowing models to adapt to the more realistic poor colon preparation environment. In continuation, the fusion method used in ST-ColoNet to fuse general and edge-based spatial features is simple concatenation. While this is the most straightforward way of fusing these two types of information, a more effective method could be substituted which would allow for more effective interaction between these two types of information. Lastly, in ST-ColoNet, the spatial and temporal features are extracted separately from the colonoscopy videos, but in reality, their information is co-interactive. Future research could extract and fuse both spatial and temporal information at the same time, and through multiple refinement stages such as in MS-TCN, to extract more representative and effective spatiotemporal features. 

# 6 Conclusions 

We go forth and share a brand-new colonoscopy video dataset for the specific task of colo-segment recognition, with the inclusion of detailed ground-truth labels provided by expert endoscopists. In addition, we present a novel framework which incorporates temporally-based features in addition to metric learning-mediated spatial features to effectively and accurately recognize colo-segments from colonoscopy withdrawal videos. Inclusion of these features not only allows our method to exploit the naturally occurring temporal sequence of colonic segment appearance in colonoscopy videos, but also effectively medi-ates the low inter-class and high intra-class variance problem existent between different colonic segments. This improvement in recognition performance in comparison to previous image-based methods suggests that temporal exploita-tion and video-based methods are beneficial for the colo-segment recognition task. 

# References 

Azagra P, Sostres C, Ferr´ andez ´A, et al (2023) Endomapper dataset of complete calibrated endoscopy procedures. Scientific Data 10(1):671 Bahrami E, Francesca G, Gall J (2023) How much temporal long-term con-text is needed for action segmentation? In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp 10,351–10,361 Balntas V, Riba E, Ponsa D, et al (2016) Learning local feature descriptors with triplets and shallow convolutional neural networks. In: Bmvc, p 3 Basu M (2002) Gaussian-based edge-detection methods-a survey. IEEE Trans-actions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews) 32(3):252–260 Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Wang et al. 19 Borgli H, Thambawita V, Smedsrud PH, et al (2020) Hyperkvasir, a compre-hensive multi-class image and video dataset for gastrointestinal endoscopy. Scientific data 7(1):283 Bortz JH (2016) CT colonography for radiographers: a guide to performance and image interpretation. Springer Chen RJ, Bobrow TL, Athey T, et al (2019) Slam endoscopy enhanced by adversarial depth prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:190700283 Czempiel T, Paschali M, Keicher M, et al (2020) Tecno: Surgical phase recog-nition with multi-stage temporal convolutional networks. In: International conference on medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention, Springer, pp 343–352 Ding X, Yan X, Wang Z, et al (2023) Less is more: Surgical phase recogni-tion from timestamp supervision. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 42(6):1897–1910 Dosovitskiy A (2020) An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:201011929 Farha YA, Gall J (2019) Ms-tcn: Multi-stage temporal convolutional network for action segmentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 3575–3584 Gao X, Jin Y, Long Y, et al (2021) Trans-svnet: Accurate phase recogni-tion from surgical videos via hybrid embedding aggregation transformer. In: International conference on medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention, Springer, pp 593–603 Harzig P, Einfalt M, Lienhart R (2019) Automatic disease detection and report generation for gastrointestinal tract examination. In: Proceedings of the 27th ACM international conference on multimedia, pp 2573–2577 He K, Zhang X, Ren S, et al (2016) Deep residual learning for image recogni-tion. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 770–778 Houwen BB, Hartendorp F, Giotis I, et al (2023) Computer-aided classification of colorectal segments during colonoscopy: a deep learning approach based on images of a magnetic endoscopic positioning device. Scandinavian Journal of Gastroenterology 58(6):649–655 Jheng YC, Wang YP, Lin HE, et al (2022) A novel machine learning-based algorithm to identify and classify lesions and anatomical landmarks in colonoscopy images. Surgical endoscopy 36(1):640–650 Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 20 Wang et al. 

Jin W, Daher R, Stoyanov D, et al (2023) A self-supervised approach for detecting the edges of haustral folds in colonoscopy video. In: MICCAI Workshop on Data Engineering in Medical Imaging, Springer, pp 56–66 Jin Y, Dou Q, Chen H, et al (2017) Sv-rcnet: workflow recognition from surgical videos using recurrent convolutional network. IEEE transactions on medical imaging 37(5):1114–1126 Jin Y, Li H, Dou Q, et al (2020) Multi-task recurrent convolutional network with correlation loss for surgical video analysis. Medical image analysis 59:101,572 Lea C, Vidal R, Reiter A, et al (2016) Temporal convolutional networks: A uni-fied approach to action segmentation. In: European conference on computer vision, Springer, pp 47–54 Lea C, Flynn MD, Vidal R, et al (2017) Temporal convolutional networks for action segmentation and detection. In: proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 156–165 Lee SH, Park YK, Lee DJ, et al (2014) Colonoscopy procedural skills and training for new beginners. World Journal of Gastroenterology: WJG 20(45):16,984 Ozyoruk KB, Gokceler GI, Bobrow TL, et al (2021) Endoslam dataset and an unsupervised monocular visual odometry and depth estimation approach for endoscopic videos. Medical image analysis 71:102,058 Poma XS, Riba E, Sappa A (2020) Dense extreme inception network: Towards a robust cnn model for edge detection. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter conference on applications of computer vision, pp 1923–1932 Saito H, Tanimoto T, Ozawa T, et al (2021) Automatic anatomical classi-fication of colonoscopic images using deep convolutional neural networks. Gastroenterology report 9(3):226–233 Simonyan K, Zisserman A (2014) Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:14091556 Sobel I, Feldman G, et al (1968) A 3x3 isotropic gradient operator for image processing a talk at the stanford artificial project in 1968. Google Scholar pp 271–272 Szegedy C, Liu W, Jia Y, et al (2015) Going deeper with convolutions. In: Pro-ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 1–9 Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Wang et al. 21 Tao R, Zou X, Zheng G (2023) Last: Latent space-constrained transformers for automatic surgical phase recognition and tool presence detection. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 42(11):3256–3268 Xiang S, Chen Q, Cai S, et al (2023) Towards discriminative representation with meta-learning for colonoscopic polyp re-identification. arXiv preprint arXiv:230800929 Xiang S, Guan J, Cai S, et al (2024a) Learning collaborative knowledge with multimodal representation for polyp re-identification. arXiv preprint arXiv:240805914 Xiang S, Liu C, Ruan J, et al (2024b) Vt-reid: learning discriminative visual-text representation for polyp re-identification. In: ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), IEEE, pp 3170–3174 Yee J (2008) Virtual colonoscopy. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins Yi F, Wen H, Jiang T (2021) Asformer: Transformer for action segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:211008568 Yue W, Liao H, Xia Y, et al (2023) Cascade multi-level transformer net-work for surgical workflow analysis. IEEE transactions on medical imaging 42(10):2817–2831 Zaheer M, Guruganesh G, Dubey KA, et al (2020) Big bird: Transformers for longer sequences. Advances in neural information processing systems 33:17,283–17,297 Zhang C, Xiang S, You L (2026) Medcore: Boundary-preserving medical core pruning for medsam. arXiv preprint arXiv:260513688 Zhou J, Wu L, Wan X, et al (2020) A novel artificial intelligence system for the assessment of bowel preparation (with video). Gastrointestinal endoscopy 91(2):428–435 Zhou W, Yao L, Wu H, et al (2021) Multi-step validation of a deep learning-based system for the quantification of bowel preparation: a prospective, observational study. The Lancet Digital Health 3(11):e697–e706