Title: Grounded Decoding: Retrieval-Anchored Probability Fusion for Faithful RAG

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.00432v1

Published Time: Tue, 02 Jun 2026 00:25:41 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Grounded Decoding: Retrieval-Anchored Probability Fusion for Faithful RAG 

Ibne Farabi Shihab 1 and Fariya Afrin 2 and Sanjeda Akter 1 and Anuj Sharma 3

> 1

Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University 

> 2

Department of Computer Science, Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology 

> 3

Department of Civil, Construction & Environmental Engineering, Iowa State University 

ishihab@iastate.edu 

Abstract 

As retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) sys-tems scale, it becomes increasingly challenging to ensure faithful grounding in external evi-dence. Large language models may still pri-oritize parametric knowledge over retrieved information when conflicts arise. We pro-pose a novel training-free decoding frame-work, Grounded Decoding , designed to im-prove factual consistency in RAG without mod-ifying model parameters. Unlike standard ap-proaches that rely on a single conditional dis-tribution, our method constructs two matched-prompt distributions at every generation step: (1) a full RAG distribution conditioned on the query, retrieved documents, and generated pre-fix, and (2) a retrieval-only distribution con-ditioned solely on retrieved evidence and the same prefix. The final next-token distribu-tion is derived as the unique solution to a KL-barycenter objective over the probability sim-plex, yielding a normalized geometric fusion of the two distributions.This formulation naturally recovers standard RAG when the grounding weight is zero and smoothly shifts probabil-ity mass toward retrieved evidence as ground-ing strength increases. We further introduce a conflict-aware adaptive weighting scheme that dynamically adjusts grounding based on distributional disagreement and retriever confi-dence. Experiments on ALCE, Natural Ques-tions, and FActScore demonstrate consistent improvements in factual accuracy and citation quality over standard RAG and competitive decoding-time baselines, while maintaining flu-ency. Our results indicate that probability-level fusion provides a strong and efficient alterna-tive to logit-level intervention methods for faith-ful RAG decoding. 

1 Introduction 

Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) has be-come a standard mechanism for connecting large language models to external knowledge sources (Lewis et al., 2020; Guu et al., 2020; Borgeaud et al., 2022), yet these systems still struggle to ensure faithful grounding in retrieved evidence. While retrievers supply passages that can be in-spected and cited, and generators transform them into fluent responses, this separation does not guar-antee that generated outputs remain fully supported by the provided context. The generator may still rely on parametric knowledge, ignore relevant ev-idence, or produce statements that are plausible but not grounded in the retrieved documents (Ji et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2025). These limita-tions are particularly evident in long-form ques-tion answering and biography generation, where responses contain multiple atomic facts and only a subset is explicitly supported by the retrieved corpus (Gao et al., 2023; Min et al., 2023). Recent work has explored decoding-time inter-ventions as a lightweight alternative to retraining large language models. Context-Aware Decod-ing (CAD) introduces a contrast between context-conditioned and context-free distributions, ampli-fying tokens that depend on external evidence (Shi et al., 2024). Several adaptive variants, includ-ing AdaCAD, COIECD, and CoCoA, further re-fine this mechanism by adjusting contrast strength based on contextual reliability (Wang et al., 2025; Yuan et al., 2024; Khandelwal et al., 2025). While these approaches are effective in practice, they are typically formulated as logit-level manipulations, which makes the induced probability distribution difficult to interpret and complicates analysis of boundary behavior and implementation under mod-ern caching-based inference systems. We revisit grounded decoding for RAG from the perspective of probability fusion on the probability simplex. Instead of performing logit subtraction or contrastive scaling, we construct a full RAG dis-tribution conditioned on the query, retrieved docu-ments, and prefix, together with a retrieval-only dis-tribution computed under a matched prompt. The 1

> arXiv:2606.00432v1 [cs.LG] 29 May 2026

resulting decoding objective is formulated as a KL barycenter between the two distributions, which admits a closed-form solution as a normalized ge-ometric mixture (logarithmic opinion pool). This formulation provides a clean interpretation: the method recovers standard RAG when the ground-ing weight is zero, and smoothly interpolates to-ward the retrieval-only distribution as grounding strength increases. Unlike linear contrastive formu-lations in logit space, this objective avoids double-counting effects and yields stable behavior across limiting regimes. Beyond this formulation, several practical con-siderations arise in implementing grounded decod-ing. The retrieval-only stream must be evaluated using the same autoregressive prefix as the full RAG stream, which requires a synchronized dual-stream decoding process. As a result, both streams evolve token-by-token and maintain separate key-value caches rather than relying on precomputed retrieval representations. This structure is essen-tial for correctness but is often omitted in prior contrastive decoding formulations. We further introduce an adaptive grounding mechanism that dynamically adjusts the fusion strength based on distributional disagreement and retriever confidence. Specifically, the grounding weight increases when the Jensen–Shannon diver-gence between the full and retrieval-only distri-butions is high, indicating conflict between para-metric and external evidence, and decreases when retrieval confidence is low to prevent over-reliance on noisy evidence. This design couples the opti-mization objective with the decoding dynamics, en-abling stronger grounding on factual tokens while preserving fluency in low-confidence regions. We evaluate Grounded Decoding against stan-dard RAG, CAD, adaptive CAD variants, DoLa, and kNN-LM under matched decoding conditions. Experiments on ALCE, Natural Questions, and FActScore demonstrate consistent improvements in factuality and citation quality while maintaining competitive fluency. Ablation studies show that the retrieval-only distribution is the primary driver of gains, that the KL barycenter formulation con-sistently outperforms linear mixtures, and that the adaptive grounding mechanism is predominantly activated on factual spans rather than uniformly across generated outputs. Our contributions include: • A probability-fusion framework for RAG de-coding based on a KL barycenter formulation • A closed-form normalized geometric mixture between full RAG and retrieval-only distribu-tions • A synchronized dual-stream decoding mecha-nism for consistent autoregressive evaluation • An adaptive grounding strategy based on dis-tributional disagreement and retriever confi-dence • Extensive empirical validation showing im-proved factuality and citation quality across benchmarks Our findings reveal that probability-level fusion provides a principled mechanism for improving faithfulness in RAG decoding, with retrieval-only grounding playing a more critical role than full-context generation in resolving factual inconsis-tencies. These results improve the reliability of grounded generation and deepen our understand-ing of probabilistic evidence integration in large language model decoding. 

2 Related Work 

Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) connects parametric language models with non-parametric memory or external documents (Lewis et al., 2020; Guu et al., 2020; Borgeaud et al., 2022). In open-domain question answering and long-form gener-ation, factual correctness alone is insufficient, as outputs must be grounded in the provided evidence. This has led to increased emphasis on attribution and citation quality as key evaluation dimensions (Gao et al., 2023; Min et al., 2023; Kwiatkowski et al., 2019). 

Training-time and Decoding-time Methods 

Training-time approaches address this issue through instruction tuning, preference optimization, and self-refinement (Ouyang et al., 2022; Rafailov et al., 2023; Asai et al., 2024). While effective, these methods require additional data and train-ing compute and are less flexible once deployed. Decoding-time methods provide a complementary alternative, as they operate on frozen models and can be integrated with improved retrievers or veri-fication modules. 2Context-Aware Decoding Within this family, Context-Aware Decoding (CAD) introduces a con-trastive mechanism that amplifies tokens whose probabilities depend on the provided context (Shi et al., 2024). Adaptive variants such as AdaCAD, COIECD, and CoCoA extend this idea by mod-eling context uncertainty or model disagreement and adjusting the contrastive strength dynamically (Wang et al., 2025; Yuan et al., 2024; Khandelwal et al., 2025). However, these methods are typically implemented at the logit level, which makes the induced probability distributions less explicit and limits direct interpretability. A more comprehensive discussion of Grounded Decoding, Decoding-Time Interventions, Con-trollable Generation Methods, and Retrieval-Grounding approaches is provided in Appendix A. 

3 Methodology 

3.1 Problem Formulation and Background 

Let x denote a query and D = {d1, . . . , d m} the documents returned by a retriever. A RAG model generates y = ( y1, . . . , y T ) autoregressively from a prompt containing both x and D. At decoding step t, the generated prefix is y<t , the vocabulary is V with |V| = V , and the probability simplex is 

∆V = {q ∈ RV : qi ≥ 0,

> V

X

> i=1

qi = 1 }. (1) The standard full RAG distribution is defined as 

pfull t(i) = pθ(i | x, D, y <t ), (2) which serves as the base distribution for conven-tional decoding strategies, including greedy decod-ing, nucleus sampling, and beam search, prior to any grounding-specific modification. The primary limitation of this distribution is that it is not explicitly constrained to be evidence-aware. Although retrieval provides access to relevant docu-ments, it does not enforce alignment between next-token probabilities and the retrieved evidence. As a result, the model may default to memorized para-metric knowledge, interpolate across inconsistent passages, or produce connective statements that are not supported by the evidence. This issue becomes particularly pronounced in knowledge-conflict set-tings, where retrieved documents may deliberately contradict the model’s parametric memory (Long-pre et al., 2021). A faithful decoder should there-fore respond to such conflicts in a local and context-sensitive manner, rather than uniformly modifying all tokens, by increasing reliance on external evi-dence when disagreement arises between the full RAG distribution and an evidence-conditioned ref-erence. This motivation has led to a family of contrastive decoding approaches. Context-Aware Decoding (CAD) introduces a logit-level contrast between a full-context model and a context-removed variant (Shi et al., 2024). In log-probability form, this can be expressed as 

log qCAD ,t (i) ∝ (1 + β) log pθ(i | x, D, y <t )

− β log pθ(i | x, y <t ), (3) where β controls the degree of contextual amplifica-tion. Subsequent adaptive variants replace the fixed weighting parameter with signals derived from dis-tributional disagreement or uncertainty estimates (Wang et al., 2025; Yuan et al., 2024; Khandelwal et al., 2025). While effective, these methods oper-ate primarily at the logit level, which obscures the resulting probability distribution and complicates direct interpretation. Grounded Decoding belongs to the same general class of contrastive methods and can similarly be implemented as a post-hoc transformation of the model’s output distribution. However, it is not a direct reformulation of CAD. In contrast to CAD, which suppresses tokens that are likely in the ab-sence of context, Grounded Decoding explicitly promotes tokens that remain probable under the retrieved documents themselves. This distinction leads to different optimization behavior and empir-ical effects, particularly in settings requiring fine-grained evidence alignment. A useful conceptual perspective arises from re-cent work framing decoding as optimization over the probability simplex ∆V , where regularization terms encode preferences such as entropy control, sparsity, or truncation behavior (Ji et al., 2026). From this viewpoint, a central question in faithful RAG decoding is the choice of reference distribu-tion and the corresponding regularizer that gov-erns boundary behavior. The following section addresses this question by introducing a per-token retrieval reference and formulating decoding as a KL-barycenter problem. 

3.2 Grounded Decoding 

Figure 1 summarizes the proposed dual-stream de-coding framework, including the full RAG stream, the retrieval-only stream, and the KL-barycenter fusion step. 3Figure 1: Grounded Decoding maintains two matched decoding streams. The full stream conditions on the query and retrieved documents, while the retrieval stream conditions only on the retrieved documents and the same generated prefix. The final fused distribution is computed as a KL barycenter with an adaptive weighting scheme. 

A per-token retrieval reference We define a retrieval-conditioned reference distribution using the same language model and the same generated prefix as the full RAG stream, but under a prompt that includes only the retrieved documents and omits the user query: 

pret t(i) = pθ(i | D , y <t ). (4) Since this distribution is computed using the model’s own output head, it remains dense over the full vocabulary, is fully compatible with the model’s tokenization scheme, and avoids calibra-tion inconsistencies that may arise when combin-ing heterogeneous probability sources. Importantly, the dependence on y<t is essential: the distribution 

pret ,t varies with the generated prefix, and therefore precomputing pθ(· | D ) independently of genera-tion is not valid. In practice, the document component of the prompt can be prefetched into a retrieval-stream key-value cache; however, each generated token still requires a forward pass conditioned on this cache. A consistent prompt formulation is also critical. For instruction-tuned models, the full and retrieval streams must share the same chat template, sys-tem message, document formatting, and assistant prefix, differing only in the inclusion or exclusion of the query. Otherwise, discrepancies between 

pfull t and pret t may reflect prompt-format artifacts rather than genuine evidence sensitivity, leading to an incorrect characterization of distributional differences. Section G provides the exact prompt templates used in our implementation, and Figure 3 visualizes the controlled difference between the full and retrieval-only streams. 

KL barycenter objective and closed form We aim to construct a fused next-token distribution that remains faithful to the full RAG distribution while incorporating constraints from retrieved evidence. In particular, the decoder should preserve standard query-conditioned behavior while simultaneously assigning higher probability mass to tokens sup-ported by external documents. This trade-off can be naturally formulated as a KL barycenter. For a grounding weight ρt ≥ 0, Grounded Decoding is defined as: 

qGD t = arg min 

> q∈∆V

[KL( q ∥ pfull t) + ρtKL( q ∥ pret t)] .

(5) The first term penalizes departure from standard RAG; the second term pulls the distribution toward tokens that remain likely under the retrieved evi-4dence. The scalar ρt controls how much retrieval anchoring is applied at this token, and we will al-low it to vary with the input and the decoding state in Section 3.3. The objective admits a unique closed-form solu-tion that is straightforward to compute. 

Theorem 1 (Closed-form grounded distribution) .

Assume pfull t(i) > 0 and pret t(i) > 0 for all i ∈ V ,and let ρt ≥ 0. The unique minimizer of Eq. (5) is 

qGD t(i) = pfull t(i)1/(1+ ρt)pret t(i)ρt/(1+ ρt)

Zt

, (6) 

Zt = X

> j∈V

pfull t(j)1/(1+ ρt)pret t(j)ρt/(1+ ρt).

Equivalently, with ηt = ρt/(1 + ρt) ∈ [0 , 1) ,

log qGD t(i) = (1 − ηt) log pfull t(i)+ ηt log pret t(i) − At, (7) 

where At is the log normalizer. Proof. Expanding the objective gives 

KL( q∥pfull ,t ) + ρtKL( q∥pret ,t )= (1 + ρt) X

> i

qi log qi − X

> i

qi log pfull ,t (i)

− ρt

X

> i

qi log pret ,t (i) + C. (8) where C collects entropy-of-reference constants that do not affect the minimizer. Introducing a Lagrange multiplier μ for the constraint P 

> i

qi = 1 ,the first-order condition at any coordinate in the relative interior of the simplex is 

(1 + ρt)(log qi + 1) − log pfull t(i)

− ρt log pret t(i) + μ = 0 .

(9) Solving for qi and normalizing over the vocabulary yields Eq. (6). Strict convexity of the objective fol-lows because the negative entropy term has positive coefficient 1 + ρt while the reference-dependent terms are linear in q, so the optimum is unique. Full support of the two softmax distributions en-sures that the optimum lies in the relative interior in exact arithmetic; Section B discusses numerical considerations. The closed form makes the boundary behavior of the method easy to read off. When ρt = 0 , the exponent ηt is also zero and qGD t collapses exactly onto pfull t; the method is therefore an exact exten-sion of standard RAG rather than a perturbation that must be tuned toward zero to recover the base-line. As ρt → ∞ , ηt → 1 and qGD t → pret t, so very large grounding weights anchor the decoder to the retrieval reference. Intermediate values in-terpolate smoothly between the two. The log-odds between any two tokens i and j take the equally simple form 

log qGD t(i)

qGD t(j) = (1 − ηt) log pfull t(i)

pfull t(j)+ ηt log pret t(i)

pret t(j) , (10) which shows that the fused distribution prefers to-ken i over token j whenever both streams prefer 

i, but reweights more cautiously when the two streams disagree. The update is invariant to ad-ditive shifts in logits because it is written in log probabilities, and its scale is controlled by ρt rather than by the arbitrary magnitude of raw model log-its. Finally, the KL-barycenter formulation avoids degeneracies that may arise in linear logit inter-polation with KL regularization. In such cases, the objective can implicitly double-count the full-context distribution, leading to non-monotonic be-havior in the regularization strength. In contrast, the barycentric formulation ensures a direct and monotone interpolation between the two distribu-tions. A detailed comparison is provided in Sec-tion C; Figures 4 and 5 visualize the KL-barycenter interpolation and its contrast with arithmetic proba-bility mixing. 

3.3 Adaptive Grounding 

A fixed grounding weight is suboptimal in retrieval-augmented decoding, as it is often insufficient when the model prior conflicts with external ev-idence and overly restrictive when retrieved pas-sages are noisy or irrelevant. The closed-form solu-tion in Eq. (6) suggests a natural balancing princi-ple: the grounding weight ρt should increase under stronger disagreement between the two decoding streams and decrease when retrieval reliability is low. Accordingly, we define 

ρt = ρmax r(x, D) ct, (11) where ρmax is a scalar hyperparameter tuned on a validation split under the same budget as CAD, AdaCAD, COIECD, and CoCoA. The terms ct and 5r(x, D) capture token-level conflict and instance-level retrieval trust, respectively. Figure 2 illus-trates this computation graphically, showing how token-level conflict and retrieval trust jointly deter-mine the adaptive grounding weight. The token-level conflict score quantifies local disagreement between the full RAG distribution and the retrieval-conditioned distribution. We de-fine a normalized Jensen–Shannon divergence: 

ct = JS( pfull ,t , p ret ,t )log 2 , (12) 

JS( p, q ) = 12 KL( p∥m) + 12 KL( q∥m),m = p + q

2 .

which is bounded in [0 , 1] for finite vocabularies un-der natural logarithms. Higher disagreement leads to increased grounding strength by amplifying the contribution of the retrieval distribution in Eq. (6), consistent with the underlying optimization objec-tive. Compared to KL divergence, JS divergence is symmetric and bounded, providing improved sta-bility for adaptive control even in cases of highly skewed distributions. The instance-level retrieval trust score is de-signed to mitigate over-grounding when retrieval quality is unreliable. Let sk denote the relevance score associated with passage dk. We compute normalized weights as 

ak = exp( sk/τ r)

Pmℓ=1 exp( sℓ/τ r) , (13) where τr is a temperature parameter, set on the validation split or fixed to one when retriever scores are already calibrated. The aggregated retrieval score is defined as ¯s = P 

> k

aksk, which is mapped to a bounded trust signal via 

r(x, D) = σ γ(¯ s − b), (14) where b is the median top-document score on the validation set and γ controls the slope of the gating function. This signal does not aim to verify fac-tual correctness; instead, it serves as a conservative mechanism that reduces grounding strength under low-confidence retrieval conditions. The score is computed once per instance, ensuring that the addi-tional computational overhead remains negligible relative to per-token operations. For ablation purposes, we also evaluate a static variant in which ρt ≡ ρ, thereby removing adap-tive modulation. This setting isolates the effect of the KL-barycenter objective from the proposed scheduling strategy. Empirically, the static vari-ant already yields consistent improvements over standard RAG decoding, while the adaptive for-mulation provides additional gains, particularly in high-conflict or low-retrieval-quality settings. Figure 1 provides an overview of the proposed framework and Algorithm 1 formalizes its algorith-mic implementation. The complete procedure is presented in Algorithm 1, with detailed implemen-tation specifics and the full algorithmic description deferred to Appendix E. 

4 Experimental Setup 

We evaluate Grounded Decoding under a matched decoding protocol designed to isolate the effect of the decoding strategy from other confounding factors. All methods are evaluated under identi-cal settings, including retrieved passages, prompt templates, citation format, sampling temperature, truncation strategy, stopping criteria, and maximum generation length. Hyperparameters are selected on a validation split with an equal tuning budget across methods, and all reported results are com-puted on a held-out test set. We report paired boot-strap 95% confidence intervals over test instances using 10,000 resamples, with all metrics computed over the same generated outputs for fair compari-son. The base model is Llama-3-8B-Instruct (Meta AI, 2024), and the retriever is Contriever (Izacard et al., 2022), which indexes a fixed Wikipedia snap-shot across all knowledge-intensive tasks. All ex-periments are conducted on NVIDIA A100 80GB GPUs using a vLLM backend modified to support dual-stream probability fusion. We release the full experimental setup, including model checkpoints, tokenizer, chat templates, retrieval index snapshot, CUDA version, vLLM commit, and random seeds, to ensure full reproducibility. We evaluate on standard benchmarks including ALCE (ASQA, QAMPARI, and ELI5), reporting correctness, citation precision, citation recall, ci-tation F1, and MAUVE (Gao et al., 2023); Natu-ral Questions, reporting exact match, token-level F1, and evidence support rate (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019); and FActScore, reporting atomic factual pre-cision, along with average number of atomic facts and average generation length (Min et al., 2023). Reporting both length and fact counts alongside factuality metrics is necessary to ensure that im-6provements are not driven by overly conservative or overly verbose generation behavior. The baseline set includes standard RAG using the same retriever and matched decoding configu-ration; CAD with a validation-tuned β; AdaCAD, COIECD, and CoCoA with their published adap-tive mechanisms under an equal tuning budget; DoLa with a validation-selected layer configura-tion; and kNN-LM with a fixed retrieval datastore. Section D provides the full tuning grid and imple-mentation details for all baselines. 

5 Results 

Aggregate Performance Comparison The ag-gregate performance is presented in Table 1. The adaptive variant of Grounded Decoding achieves the highest FActScore, evidence support rate, and citation F1 among the evaluated decoding-time methods, while maintaining MAUVE comparable to standard RAG. The static variant also improves over standard RAG and all evaluated baselines, in-dicating that the KL-barycenter objective with a retrieval reference contributes a substantial portion of the overall gain. The adaptive schedule provides additional consistent improvements by modulating grounding strength at high-conflict tokens. The results align with the design motivation of the method: the static formulation already biases generation toward evidence-consistent to-kens, while the adaptive mechanism further concen-trates this effect on tokens where retrieval-model disagreement is most pronounced.The aggregate trends in factuality, citation quality, and fluency are visualized in Figures 6 to 8. 

Ablation Study The ablation results in Table 2 disentangle the contributions of individual compo-nents. We replace the retrieval-only reference with a query-only reference (closer in spirit to CAD) and observe a notable drop in performance, with FActScore decreasing by nearly five points and ci-tation F1 decreasing by more than four points. This result confirms that the retrieval-conditioned stream serves as the primary source of improvement. The arithmetic interpolation (1 − α)pfull t + αp ret t re-mains competitive, which shows that the existence of a retrieval-only reference matters more than the exact fusion form; however, the KL barycenter consistently performs better, which suggests more effective suppression of tokens deemed implausi-ble by either stream. We ablate either the conflict-based factor or the retrieval-trust factor from the adaptive schedule and observe degraded perfor-mance relative to the full model, although both vari-ants still outperform the static baseline. This result indicates that both components contribute comple-mentary signals. We further analyze average facts and token counts, which rule out length effects and confirm that gains do not arise from shorter or more conservative generations. Supplementary ablation visualizations are provided in Figures 9 to 11. 

Token-Level Analysis To ground the analysis at the token level, Table 3 presents a representa-tive decoding trace from the FActScore evaluation set. The conflict score and grounding weight re-main low for function words but increase sharply at tokens corresponding to factual entities such as years, occupations, and geographic names, which are known to be frequent sources of hallucination in long-form generation. We record these quantities alongside pfull t(yt), pret t(yt), and qGD t(yt) for all evaluated instances in the released artifact. These traces serve as behavioral diagnostics of the decod-ing dynamics rather than as evidence of internal causal mechanisms.Figures 12 and 14 provide com-plementary visualizations of the same token-level grounding behavior. 

Sensitivity Analysis Sensitivity to the ground-ing weight remains limited across a broad valida-tion range. For small values of ρmax , the behavior closely resembles standard RAG, as ρt remains near zero for most decoding steps. In contrast, very large values over-anchor generation to the re-trieval stream and may reduce answer specificity, particularly in ELI5-style settings where responses require additional explanatory content beyond re-trieved facts. The selected operating point balances improvements in attribution quality against poten-tial degradation in linguistic richness. Full sweep curves with confidence intervals are provided in the released artifact. 

Efficiency Analysis The computational overhead associated with the additional decoding stream is reported in Table 4. Grounded Decoding approx-imately doubles per-token decoding time relative to standard RAG, which is expected given that the method computes both full-context and retrieval-conditioned next-token distributions at each decod-ing step. The resulting latency remains compara-ble to that of contrastive decoding baselines that similarly rely on multiple decoding streams. The modest increase in memory consumption relative 7Table 1: Main evaluation results under the matched decoding protocol. Grounded Decoding is the strongest method among the evaluated decoding-time baselines on factuality and citation metrics while maintaining comparable MAUVE fluency. Subscripts denote 95% paired bootstrap confidence intervals. Best results are in bold. 

Method NQ EM NQ F1 Support ALCE Correct Cit. P Cit. R Cit. F1 MAUVE FActScore 

Standard RAG 41.2 ±1.1 49.3 ±1.0 62.1 ±1.2 42.5 ±1.0 45.1 ±1.0 50.2 ±1.1 47.5 ±0.9 0.88 ±0.01 71.2 ±1.5

CAD 42.1 ±1.2 50.4 ±1.1 65.4 ±1.3 44.2 ±1.2 48.3 ±1.1 51.5 ±1.1 49.8 ±1.1 0.85 ±0.02 74.5 ±1.4

AdaCAD 44.3 ±1.0 52.1 ±0.9 68.2 ±1.1 46.5 ±1.1 52.1 ±1.0 53.4 ±1.0 52.7 ±1.0 0.86 ±0.02 78.1 ±1.2

COIECD 44.8 ±1.1 52.5 ±1.0 69.1 ±1.0 46.8 ±1.0 52.8 ±1.0 54.1 ±1.0 53.4 ±0.9 0.87 ±0.01 78.9 ±1.1

CoCoA 45.1 ±1.0 52.8 ±0.9 69.8 ±1.2 47.2 ±0.9 53.5 ±1.0 54.8 ±1.0 54.1 ±1.0 0.87 ±0.01 79.5 ±1.2

DoLa 42.5 ±1.2 50.1 ±1.1 64.2 ±1.1 43.8 ±1.1 47.1 ±1.1 50.1 ±1.1 48.5 ±1.1 0.86 ±0.02 73.2 ±1.4

kNN-LM 41.8 ±1.1 49.8 ±1.0 63.5 ±1.3 43.1 ±1.0 46.5 ±1.0 50.8 ±1.1 48.5 ±1.0 0.88 ±0.01 72.5 ±1.5

Grounded Decoding (static) 45.8 ±0.9 53.5 ±0.8 71.5 ±1.0 48.5 ±0.8 55.2 ±0.9 56.5 ±0.9 55.8 ±0.9 0.89 ±0.01 81.2 ±1.0

Grounded Decoding (adaptive) 47.6 ±0.8 55.2 ±0.8 74.8 ±0.9 50.2 ±0.8 58.4 ±0.8 58.9 ±0.9 58.6 ±0.8 0.89 ±0.01 84.5 ±0.9

Table 2: Ablations. Each row changes one component relative to full adaptive Grounded Decoding. Average length and average atomic facts help rule out gains caused only by shorter generations.                                        

> Variant FActScore Cit. F1 Avg. facts Avg. tokens
> Standard RAG, ρt= 0 71.2 47.5 24.5 185 Static ρ81.2 55.8 23.8 180 Conflict only, r(x, D) = 1 82.1 56.5 23.5 178 Trust only, ct= 1 81.8 56.2 24.0 181 Query-only reference 76.5 51.2 24.2 183 Arithmetic mixture 82.5 56.8 23.6 179 Full adaptive Grounded 84.5 58.6 23.4 176

Table 3: Token-level trace from a representative FActScore biography. Adaptive grounding activates on factual spans (year, occupation, geographic relation) and remains close to zero on function words. 

Generated token JS ρt ηt

The 0.02 0.06 0.06 

novelist 0.41 1.27 0.56 

was 0.03 0.09 0.08 

born 0.04 0.13 0.12 

in 0.05 0.16 0.14 

1947 0.62 1.92 0.66 

in 0.04 0.13 0.11 

Trieste 0.58 1.80 0.64 

to CAD primarily arises from the retrieval-stream cache and the vocabulary-level fusion buffers. In deployment scenarios where inference overhead is a primary concern, the static variant provides a favorable trade-off, achieving most of the factual-ity and citation improvements while maintaining approximately the same per-token decoding cost as CAD. 

6 Conclusion 

Grounded Decoding is most effective when the re-trieved documents are relevant and the full RAG distribution diverges from the retrieval conditioned distribution at factual decoding positions. Unlike CAD, which amplifies tokens that become more 

Table 4: Latency and memory utilization under matched hardware and generation settings. Values are means over repeated generation runs; the released artifact contains per-run logs.                     

> Method Prefill ms Decode ms/token Tokens/s Peak memory
> Standard RAG 45 12.5 80.0 1.2GB CAD 45 24.1 41.5 2.4GB AdaCAD 45 24.5 40.8 2.4GB Grounded Decoding 48 25.0 40.0 2.5GB

likely with context, Grounded Decoding empha-sizes tokens that remain probable under a document conditioned continuation. This makes decoding more directly sensitive to evidence compatibility, while the full RAG stream preserves query intent when the retrieved evidence is ambiguous. The KL barycenter combines these signals by retaining query conditioned behavior and adding retrieval grounded constraints through an auxiliary distribu-tion. Additional analysis and extended discussion are provided in Appendix F. We formulate faithful RAG decoding as a KL barycenter between the full RAG distribution and a per token retrieval only reference distribution. The objective has a unique closed form solution, reduces exactly to standard RAG when ground-ing is disabled, and moves monotonically toward evidence anchoring as grounding increases. The adaptive schedule strengthens retrieval influence when distributional conflict and retrieval trust are high. Under matched evaluation against standard RAG, CAD, AdaCAD, COIECD, CoCoA, DoLa, and kNN LM, Grounded Decoding achieves the strongest factuality and citation results among the evaluated decoding time methods while maintain-ing comparable fluency. Overall, the results support retrieval anchored probability fusion as a practical and transparent alternative to context aware logit subtraction. 8Limitations 

Grounded Decoding introduces additional infer-ence cost by requiring a second decoding stream; although this cost is comparable to other dual-stream contrastive decoding methods, it remains a non-trivial overhead relative to standard RAG. The method is dependent on retrieval quality and may faithfully reproduce incorrect or irrelevant retrieved content, and therefore does not replace improve-ments in retriever training or corpus curation. The adaptive schedule relies on validation-calibrated constants; despite equalizing tuning budgets across baselines, residual hyperparameter sensitivity may persist in deployment. The formulation operates as a local next-token fusion mechanism and does not guarantee global factual consistency across com-plete responses. In addition, the retrieval-only refer-ence may become ambiguous when documents de-scribe multiple entities or when reasoning requires aggregation across passages, limiting its effective-ness in such settings. 

References 

Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2024. Self-RAG: Learning to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, Diego de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Jacob Menick, Roman Ring, Tom Hennigan, Saffron Huang, Loren Maggiore, Chris Jones, Albin Cassirer, and 9 others. 2022. Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In 

Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 2206–2240. PMLR. Yung-Sung Chuang, Yujia Xie, Hongyin Luo, Yoon Kim, James Glass, and Pengcheng He. 2024. DoLa: Decoding by contrasting layers improves factuality in large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Sumanth Dathathri, Andrea Madotto, Janice Lan, Jane Hung, Eric Frank, Piero Molino, Jason Yosinski, and Rosanne Liu. 2020. Plug and play language models: A simple approach to controlled text generation. In 

International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. 2018. Hi-erarchical neural story generation. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 889–898. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Tianyu Gao, Howard Yen, Jiatong Yu, and Danqi Chen. 2023. Enabling large language models to generate text with citations. In Proceedings of the 2023 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 6465–6488. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Ming-Wei Chang. 2020. REALM: Retrieval-augmented language model pre-training. In Proceed-ings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 3929–3938. PMLR. Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. 2020. The curious case of neural text de-generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong Chen, Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. 2025. A survey on hallucination in large lan-guage models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions. ACM Transactions on Infor-mation Systems , 43(2):1–55. Also available as arXiv:2311.05232. Gautier Izacard, Mathilde Caron, Lucas Hosseini, Sebas-tian Riedel, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin, and Edouard Grave. 2022. Unsupervised dense informa-tion retrieval with contrastive learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Xiaotong Ji, Rasul Tutunov, Matthieu Zimmer, and Haitham Bou-Ammar. 2026. Decoding as optimi-sation on the probability simplex: From top-K to top-P (nucleus) to best-of-K samplers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.18292 .Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang, Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. 2023. Survey of halluci-nation in natural language generation. ACM Comput-ing Surveys , 55(12):1–38. Anant Khandelwal, Manish Gupta, and Puneet Agrawal. 2025. CoCoA: Confidence- and context-aware adap-tive decoding for resolving knowledge conflicts in large language models. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 6835–6855. Association for Computational Linguistics. Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, Dan Jurafsky, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. 2020. Generalization through memorization: Nearest neighbor language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Ben Krause, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Bryan McCann, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Shafiq Joty, Richard Socher, and Nazneen Fatema Rajani. 2021. GeDi: Generative 

9discriminator guided sequence generation. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: EMNLP 2021 , pages 4929–4952. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Red-field, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Ken-ton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion Jones, Matthew Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai, Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav Petrov. 2019. Natu-ral questions: A benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics , 7:452–466. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 9459– 9474. Xiang Lisa Li, Ari Holtzman, Daniel Fried, Percy Liang, Jason Eisner, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, Luke Zettle-moyer, and Mike Lewis. 2023. Contrastive decod-ing: Open-ended text generation as optimization. In 

Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 12286–12312. Association for Computational Linguistics. Shayne Longpre, Kartik Perisetla, Anthony Chen, Nikhil Ramesh, Chris DuBois, and Sameer Singh. 2021. Entity-based knowledge conflicts in ques-tion answering. In Proceedings of the 2021 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 7052–7063. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Meta AI. 2024. Meta Llama 3 model card. 

https://github.com/meta-llama/ llama3/blob/main/MODEL_CARD.md .Model card, accessed 2026-05-15. Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Pang Wei Koh, Mohit Iyyer, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. FActScore: Fine-grained atomic evaluation of factual precision in long form text generation. In Proceed-ings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 12076–12100. Association for Computational Linguistics. Minh Nguyen, Andrew Baker, Clement Neo, Allen Roush, Andreas Kirsch, and Ravid Shwartz-Ziv. 2025. Turning up the heat: Min-P sampling for cre-ative and coherent LLM outputs. In International Conference on Learning Representations . Oral; arXiv:2407.01082. Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welin-der, Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022. Training language models to follow instruc-tions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35, pages 27730–27744. Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christo-pher D. Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. 2023. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36. Weijia Shi, Xiaochuang Han, Mike Lewis, Yulia Tsvetkov, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Wen-tau Yih. 2024. Trusting your evidence: Hallucinate less with context-aware decoding. In Proceedings of the 2024 Confer-ence of the North American Chapter of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-guage Technologies (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 783–791. Association for Computational Linguistics. Han Wang, Archiki Prasad, Elias Stengel-Eskin, and Mohit Bansal. 2025. AdaCAD: Adaptively decoding to balance conflicts between contextual and paramet-ric knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2025 Confer-ence of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 11636–11652. Association for Computational Linguistics. Kevin Yang and Dan Klein. 2021. FUDGE: Controlled text generation with future discriminators. In Pro-ceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North Amer-ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 3511–3535. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Xiaowei Yuan, Zhao Yang, Yequan Wang, Shengping Liu, Jun Zhao, and Kang Liu. 2024. Discerning and resolving knowledge conflicts through adaptive decoding with contextual information-entropy con-straint. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 3903–3922. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

A Extended Related Work 

Grounded Decoding Grounded Decoding builds on this line of work but differs in formulation and objective design. Instead of contrasting against a context-free distribution, it introduces a retrieval-only distribution conditioned solely on retrieved documents. This formulation directly promotes tokens supported by external evidence rather than suppressing generic continuations. Moreover, the decoding objective is derived from an explicit op-timization problem over the probability simplex, yielding a principled probabilistic interpretation and well-behaved boundary properties. 10 Decoding-Time Interventions Decoding-time interventions have been widely studied as lightweight alternatives to retraining large language models. Contrastive Decoding compares an expert model with an amateur or degraded model to sup-press generic generations and improve specificity (Li et al., 2023). DoLa leverages differences be-tween early and late transformer layers to enhance factuality in generation (Chuang et al., 2024). kNN-LM interpolates parametric predictions with a re-trieval datastore to improve fluency and factual consistency (Khandelwal et al., 2020). 

Controllable Generation Other approaches fo-cus on controllable generation using external sig-nals. FUDGE conditions generation on future at-tribute classifiers without retraining the base model (Yang and Klein, 2021). PPLM steers generation using gradient-based updates from attribute models (Dathathri et al., 2020). GeDi uses discriminative models to guide decoding toward desired attributes (Krause et al., 2021). 

Grounding in Retrieval While these methods improve controllability or fluency, they are not ex-plicitly designed to enforce token-level grounding in retrieved evidence. In contrast, Grounded Decod-ing directly integrates retrieval information into the decoding objective to improve evidence alignment at every generation step. 

B Additional Proof Details 

The Hessian of (1 + ρt) P 

> i

qi log qi on the posi-tive orthant is diagonal with entries (1 + ρt)/q i,which are strictly positive for qi > 0. The remain-ing terms in Eq. (5) are linear in q. The objective is therefore strictly convex on the relative interior of the simplex, and the optimum is unique. Since 

pfull t and pret t have full support in exact softmax arithmetic, the optimizer also has full support, and the first-order condition used in the proof of Theo-rem 1 applies coordinate-wise. Numerically, both reference distributions can have entries that underflow in low-precision arith-metic. We compute the fusion entirely in log space, 

log qGD t = (1 − ηt) log pfull t + ηt log pret t, fol-lowed by a single logsumexp for the normalizer. When the base model runs in fp16 or bfloat16, the fusion and divergence computations are cast to float32 for stability. This is purely a numerical convenience and does not change the closed-form solution. Equation (6) can be viewed as a two-expert prod-uct model with exponents that sum to one, in the sense of a logarithmic opinion pool. The inter-pretation is useful but should not be overstated, because both experts are the same base language model under different prompts, and their errors are typically correlated. The method is therefore not an ensemble of independently trained models, and the gains we observe cannot be attributed to error decorrelation as in traditional ensembling. An arithmetic mixture (1 − α)pfull t + αp ret t also gives exact fallback to the full distribution at α = 0 ,but it behaves differently in the tails. The geometric mixture in Eq. (6) penalizes tokens that either dis-tribution assigns very low probability to, while an arithmetic mixture can keep such tokens alive when one distribution assigns them high mass. Which behavior is preferable is an empirical question; the ablation in Table 2 shows that the geometric form outperforms the arithmetic form on factuality and citation metrics in our setting, though the gap is small enough that an arithmetic mixture remains a reasonable choice when a logarithmic implementa-tion is inconvenient. 

C Why Not a Linear Logit Objective 

A natural but flawed alternative to Eq. (5) is to minimize a linear logit term plus a KL penalty to an interpolated target distribution. That objective can produce a closed form, but it has two prob-lems in the RAG setting. First, if the target dis-tribution already includes pfull t, multiplying again by a softmax-shaped term double-counts the full-context model and produces a rule that no longer reduces to standard RAG in any limit. Second, the direction of the regularization parameter becomes easy to misinterpret: in such an objective, larger values strengthen the KL anchor toward the inter-polated target, whereas smaller values collapse the rule toward greedy logit maximization, so the pa-rameter’s qualitative effect inverts as the limit is taken. The KL-barycenter formulation avoids both issues, because it interpolates between two distri-butions directly and makes the grounding weight monotone by construction. The same monotonicity is essential for the adaptive schedule of Section 3.3 to behave as intended: increasing ρt in response to higher conflict or higher retrieval trust always shifts mass toward the retrieval reference, never away from it. 11 D Baseline Configuration 

All baselines are evaluated under a matched de-coding protocol. Hyperparameters are tuned ex-clusively on the validation set, with a fixed and comparable tuning budget across methods, as sum-marized in Table 5 

E Implementation Details and Algorithm 

We now describe the implementation details and provide the formal algorithmic procedure for Grounded Decoding.The decoder maintains two parallel streams that share identical model parame-ters, tokenizer, and decoding hyperparameters. The full stream is conditioned on a prompt contain-ing the system message, query x, and retrieved documents D, whereas the retrieval stream is con-ditioned on a matched prompt that excludes the query and includes only the system message and documents. At each decoding step t, both streams generate next-token distributions conditioned on the same generated prefix y<t . The fused distribution is computed as the KL-barycenter solution defined in Eq. (6), using the adaptive weight specified in Eq. (11). Standard decoding transformations, in-cluding temperature scaling and truncation strate-gies such as top-p, top-k, or min-p, are applied to the fused distribution qGD t prior to sampling. Fol-lowing token generation, both streams update their key-value caches with the sampled token yt, and decoding proceeds autoregressively. The proposed method operates entirely at the probability level, following the final vocabulary projection. It does not modify internal model com-ponents such as attention layers, residual connec-tions, MLP blocks, normalization modules, posi-tional encodings (e.g., RoPE or ALiBi), or par-allelization schemes including tensor or pipeline sharding. While these architectural components influence the individual stream distributions, the proposed fusion mechanism is applied as a post-hoc operation on logits. From an implementation perspective, com-putations are performed in log-space using 

log_softmax . When the underlying model op-erates in fp16 or bfloat16 precision, the fusion and divergence computations are cast to float32 to mit-igate numerical underflow in low-probability re-gions of the vocabulary distribution. All decoding constraints, including top-p, top-k, min-p, and tem-perature scaling, are applied after fusion and are 

Algorithm 1 Grounded Decoding with a per-token retrieval reference. 

Require: model M , query x, retrieved docu-ments D, retriever scores s1, . . . , s m, maxi-mum grounding weight ρmax , generation limit 

T 

> 1:

Format a full prompt with the system instruc-tion, x, and D. 

> 2:

Format a retrieval-only prompt with the same template and system instruction, containing D

and omitting only x. 

> 3:

Initialize full-stream and retrieval-stream KV caches with their respective prompts.  

> 4:

Compute retrieval trust r(x, D) from Eq. (14).  

> 5:

for t = 1 to T do  

> 6:

pfull t ← pθ(· | x, D, y <t ) from the full stream.  

> 7:

pret t ← pθ(· | D , y <t ) from the retrieval stream.  

> 8:

ct ← JS( pfull t, p ret t)/ log 2 . 

> 9:

ρt ← ρmax r(x, D) ct; ηt ← ρt/(1 + ρt). 

> 10:

log qt ← (1 − ηt) log pfull t + ηt log pret t −

log Zt. 

> 11:

Apply the matched truncation rule and sam-ple or select yt. 

> 12:

Append yt to both streams and update both KV caches.  

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

return y1, . . . , y T

kept consistent across all baselines unless explicitly stated otherwise (Holtzman et al., 2020; Fan et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 2025). The two-stream design introduces additional in-ference overhead. While the document prefix for the retrieval stream can be cached and reused across time steps, each generated token requires one for-ward pass for the full stream, one forward pass for the retrieval stream, and a subsequent fusion oper-ation over the vocabulary. Overall, the computa-tional cost is comparable to other contrastive decod-ing approaches that maintain multiple streams, with minor variations arising from prompt-length differ-ences.We empirically evaluate this computational overhead in Section 5 under controlled settings with matched context length, batch size, numerical precision, and hardware configuration. 12 Table 5: Baseline configuration and tuning budget. All hyperparameters are selected on validation data only.                            

> Method Tuned parameters Implementation notes
> Standard RAG temperature, top-p, maximum length Same retrieved passages and prompt template as all methods. CAD β∈ { 0.1,0.3,0.5,1.0,1.5,2.0}Full-context stream contrasted with query-only/no-context stream. AdaCAD published adaptation strength grid Uses the authors’ conflict-adaptive rule under the same retrieval outputs. COIECD published entropy/conflict grid Uses contextual information entropy adaptation under the same decoding budget. CoCoA published confidence/divergence grid Uses confidence and context-awareness adaptation under matched prompts. DoLa layer pair/grid from validation Same generation length and truncation rule as RAG. kNN-LM k, interpolation weight, datastore layer Datastore built from retrieved passages only for each example. Grounded static ρConstant grounding weight selected on validation. Grounded adaptive ρmax , τ r, γ Conflict and retrieval-trust schedule selected on validation.

F Extended Discussion 

The ablation study in Table 2 systematically iso-lates the contribution of each component of the proposed method. The strong performance of the arithmetic interpolation baseline indicates that the retrieval-conditioned reference itself accounts for a substantial portion of the improvement over stan-dard RAG. The geometric KL barycenter never-theless provides additional and consistent gains, suggesting that the multiplicative fusion more ef-fectively suppresses unsupported continuations fa-vored by only one stream. Token-level analysis supports this interpretation, showing that adaptive grounding primarily activates on content-bearing factual tokens rather than uniformly across the gen-erated response. Several limitations follow from this formulation. The proposed method operates as a decoding-time intervention on next-token probabilities and should not be interpreted as evidence of causal or mech-anistic factual reasoning within the model. Be-cause the method explicitly increases reliance on retrieved evidence, retrieval quality and corpus re-liability become more critical than in conventional RAG systems, increasing sensitivity to retrieval noise or poisoned corpora. In addition, the ground-ing mechanism operates locally at the token level and does not explicitly enforce global consistency across a complete response. Applications requiring stronger factual guarantees may therefore benefit from combining Grounded Decoding with down-stream verification or consistency-checking proce-dures. 

G Prompt Templates 

We use matched prompt templates throughout. The full stream contains the system message, the query, the retrieved documents, and the assistant prefix; the retrieval stream uses the same system message and document formatting but removes the query.              

> System: Use only provided documents. Cite documents when needed. User: Question: {question} Documents: Doc 1: {passage_1} ... Doc m: {passage_m} Assistant:

The matched retrieval stream is:             

> System: Use only provided documents. Cite documents when needed. User: Documents: Doc 1: {passage_1} ... Doc m: {passage_m} Assistant:

H Ethics and Broader Impact 

Grounded Decoding is designed to reduce unsup-ported generation by increasing the influence of retrieved evidence on the decoding process. While this can improve reliability in settings where the retrieval corpus is curated and up to date, it may also amplify harmful, biased, or incorrect content when the underlying corpus is polluted, untrusted, or adversarially manipulated. Consequently, de-ployment should incorporate retrieval-quality filter-ing, source verification, and appropriate safeguards on retrieved content. In addition, systems based on this approach may benefit from user-facing un-certainty indicators and transparency mechanisms to support responsible use in downstream applica-tions. 

I Supplementary Figures 

We include supplementary figures to provide fur-ther intuition, implementation detail, and empirical analysis for Grounded Decoding. These figures illustrate the adaptive grounding weight, the full and retrieval-only prompt streams, the geometry of KL-based fusion, factuality and citation results, ab-lation trends, and token-level grounding behavior. 13 Figure 2: Computation of the adaptive grounding weight ρt (3.3). The weight is defined as the product of three components: a constant ρmax tuned on a validation split, a token-level conflict score ct, and an instance-level retrieval trust score r(x, D). The conflict score ct is computed as the normalized Jensen–Shannon divergence between the full RAG distribution and the retrieval-only distribution at each decoding step. The retrieval trust score 

r(x, D) is derived from retriever passage scores via softmax normalization followed by a sigmoid gating function and is computed once per query. Low conflict or weak retrieval keeps ρt near zero, resulting in behavior similar to standard RAG. High conflict combined with strong retrieval increases ρt and shifts the KL barycenter toward the retrieval-only reference. The dashed arrow indicates that the retrieval stream contributes to both branches of the computation. 

Figure 3: Prompt templates used for the full stream and retrieval stream. Both streams share identical system message, document formatting, and assistant prefix. The retrieval stream omits only the Question: {question} field. This comparison demonstrates that the only distinction between the two streams is the presence of the query field. 

14 Figure 4: Geometric interpretation of Grounded Decoding as KL-barycenter probability fusion between the full RAG distribution pfull ,t and the retrieval-only reference distribution pret ,t . The grounding parameter ρt controls interpolation from standard RAG behavior ( ρt = 0 ) toward retrieval-anchored decoding ( ρt → ∞ ). The grounded distribution qGD  

> t

is obtained through geometric KL fusion. Adaptive grounding further adjusts retrieval influence using distributional conflict and retriever trust signals. 

Figure 5: Geometric interpretation of Grounded Decoding on the probability simplex. Each vertex corresponds to a deterministic next-token distribution. The geometric KL barycenter traces a curved path along the high-probability ridge between pfull and pret , ensuring that selected tokens remain plausible under both distributions. In contrast, the arithmetic mixture follows a linear interpolation that passes through low-density regions of the simplex, allowing tokens supported by only one stream to persist. The hatched region denotes low-probability mass under both distributions, where the geometric formulation suppresses candidate tokens while the arithmetic mixture does not. 

15 Figure 6: Comparison of factuality and QA performance across different retrieval-augmented generation meth-ods. We evaluate Standard RAG, CAD variants, CoCoA, DoLa, kNN-LM, and Grounded Decoding (static and adaptive) on Natural Questions (NQ EM and F1), Sup-port verification accuracy, and FActScore. Grounded (adaptive) consistently achieves the best performance across all metrics, demonstrating improved factual con-sistency and answer quality over both retrieval-only and decoding-time baselines. 

Figure 7: Citation quality evaluation across different retrieval-augmented generation methods. We report ALCE correctness, citation precision (Cit. P), recall (Cit. R), and F1 score across Standard RAG, CAD vari-ants, CoCoA, DoLa, kNN-LM, and Grounded Decoding (static and adaptive). Grounded (adaptive) achieves the highest performance across all citation metrics, indi-cating improved grounding quality, better attribution precision, and more reliable factual referencing com-pared to prior RAG and decoding-time baselines. 

Figure 8: Fluency evaluation across different retrieval-augmented generation methods measured us-ing MAUVE scores. We compare Standard RAG, CAD variants, CoCoA, DoLa, kNN-LM, and Grounded Decoding (static and adaptive). Grounded (adap-tive) achieves the highest MAUVE score, indicating improved fluency and naturalness while maintaining strong factual grounding compared to prior retrieval-augmented and decoding-time baselines. 

Figure 9: Ablation study on quality metrics comparing different variants of the proposed method. We evaluate Standard RAG ( ρt = 0 ), Static ρ, Conflict-only, Trust-only, Query-only reference, arithmetic mixture, and the full adaptive Grounded Decoding model. We report FActScore and citation F1. The full adaptive model con-sistently achieves the best performance, demonstrating the effectiveness of jointly modeling trust and conflict signals in grounded decoding. 

16 Figure 10: Ablation study on generation length mea-sured by average number of tokens across different variants of the proposed method. We evaluate Stan-dard RAG ( ρt = 0 ), Static ρ, Conflict-only, Trust-only, Query-only reference, arithmetic mixture, and the full adaptive Grounded Decoding model. The full adaptive model generates more concise outputs compared to most ablations while maintaining strong performance, indicat-ing improved efficiency without sacrificing grounding quality. 

Figure 11: Ablation study on factual content measured by the average number of atomic facts per generated re-sponse across different variants of the proposed method. We evaluate Standard RAG ( ρt = 0 ), Static ρ, Conflict-only, Trust-only, Query-only reference, arithmetic mix-ture, and the full adaptive Grounded Decoding model. The full adaptive model achieves the lowest number of hallucinated or unnecessary atomic facts while main-taining strong task performance, indicating improved factual conciseness and better grounded generation. 

Figure 12: Token-level adaptive grounding dynamics for a representative FActScore example. The grounding strength ηt remains low for function words such as “The” and “was”, while it increases sharply at factual spans in-cluding “novelist”, “1947”, and “Trieste”. This behavior indicates that adaptive grounding selectively activates on content-bearing tokens that are more prone to factual errors, while remaining inactive on non-factual linguis-tic structure. 

Figure 13: Performance–Latency Comparison across decoding methods. We compare Standard RAG, CAD, AdaCAD, and Grounded Decoding in terms of decoding latency (ms/token) versus FActScore. While CAD and AdaCAD incur higher latency without substantial gains in factual accuracy, Grounded Decoding achieves the best trade-off, significantly improving FActScore while maintaining comparable computational cost to other advanced decoding methods. 

17 Figure 14: Token-level grounding analysis of adaptive decoding. (a) The heatmap shows token-wise grounding signals including Jensen–Shannon divergence (JS), grounding weight ρt, and mixture coefficient ηt across tokens in a generated sentence. Higher values are observed for factual tokens such as dates and named entities, indicating stronger grounding. (b) The line plot illustrates the adaptive grounding trajectory across tokens, showing how JS divergence, ρt, and ηt evolve during generation. The model dynamically increases reliance on retrieved evidence for factual tokens while relying more on parametric generation for non-factual tokens, enabling fine-grained control of factual consistency during decoding. 

18